A Bank of England perspective on gender diversity: past,
present and future
Speech given by
Lea Paterson, Executive Director for People & Culture

Women in Finance Summit 2020, London
12 February 2020

Thank you to colleagues in the Bank’s Archives, our employee networks, our inclusion and
sustainability team, Joanne Muir and Kirsty Woodgate for their assistance in preparing this speech.
Thank you also to Joanna Place for helpful comments.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches

Thank you very much to Women in Banking and Finance (WIBF) for their invitation to speak today.
I’ve had the pleasure of working alongside a number of WIBF colleagues recently in support of their
40th anniversary celebrations this year. That has really brought home to me the great work that WIBF do
under Vivienne’s leadership, and, critically, the way that WIBF has successfully stayed at the forefront of the
changing nature of the gender diversity debate over the past four decades.
It is that changing nature of the debate about women in the workplace – and gender diversity more broadly –
that I wanted to make the theme of my remarks today.
I hope you’ll indulge me if I start with a bit of history. The Bank of England, which celebrated its 325th
anniversary last year, has a rich history and heritage. And that provides a fascinating take on the evolution of
gender diversity in the workplace through the years.
In 1694, when the Bank was founded, one of the very first decisions taken by the Bank’s Court of Directors
(its governing board) was to make a woman – Britannia – the new institution’s corporate seal1.
The Bank of England was among the first institutions in the City to employ women, although it took a further
200 years for that to happen. In 1894, the Bank appointed Janet Hogarth – who had a first-class degree from
Oxbridge – to set up a small women’s unit charged with the menial role of note-sorting that was normally
reserved for boys in their late teens. A small number of other female appointments followed Ms Hogarth’s,
albeit under strictly prescribed rules such as compulsory resignations upon marriage2.
How did it feel to be the first woman employed by the Bank – indeed one of the first women employed in the
City? This is what Ms Hogarth wrote3:
‘When I first went to went to the Bank of England in 1894, . . . . women in ordinary Banks were unheard of,
and their introduction to the Bank of England, of all places, caused a mild sensation, not to mention a series
of tiresome jokes about ‘old’ and ‘young’ ladies of Threadneedle Street 4. How tired one got of trying to smile
at them!’
Janet Hogarth might have been the first woman in history to wince inwardly at workplace banter in the City.
She wasn’t by any means the last.

For more on the history of women in the Bank, see Bank of England (2017), co-produced by the Bank’s Archives team and Women in
the Bank, the Bank’s gender network.
2
See the extract from the Court minutes in the Annex.
3
See Courtney (Hogarth) (1926).
4
The nickname ‘The Old Lady of Threadneedle Street’ was coined some 100 years prior to Janet Hogarth’s arrival at the Bank of
England, by cartoonist James Gillray. It persists to this day.
1

2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches

2

Fast forward, and women in the Bank, and indeed in the City, became much less of a sensation.
But gender stereotypes of course persisted. Those stereotypes were clearly in evidence in this archive shot
of the Bank in 1955 (see Annex). The female typists. The male bosses checking in on their work.
And, as was also the case with the City more broadly at that time, a resounding absence of ethnic diversity.
The intersectionality between gender and race is something I will come back to in a moment.
Time ticked on. In the 1990s we had the first female Chief Cashier signing our bank notes – we’ve had two
more since – and the first female member of the Bank’s Court. In the Noughties, we had our first female
Deputy Governor in Rachel Lomax. And while we’ve not yet had a female Governor5, when I look at the
great female talent we’re nurturing in the Bank – and indeed the great female talent that is being nurtured
right across banking and finance – I’m confident that the day will not be too long in coming.
For those of us within the Bank, the pace of change on gender diversity accelerated notably from 2013 with
the appointment of Mark Carney as Governor. The Governor made diversity a central pillar of our strategy at
the Bank, and led from the front with a very clear commitment to making progress. We were proud hosts, for
example, of the launch of the Women in Finance Charter at the Bank’s Threadneedle Street headquarters,
a hugely important HM Treasury initiative which has put gender diversity firmly on the boardroom agenda.
At the Bank, our focus on gender diversity does not only apply to our own people. Take the example of the
steps we are taking to improve the diversity of our external engagement with market participants 6.
And for our frontline responsibilities for the prudential supervision of banks, building societies, credit unions,
and insurers, we have made it abundantly clear that we expect our regulated firms to consider diversity when
recruiting board members. As Anna Sweeney, one of our most senior Bank of England supervisors, has put
it: “The lack of intellectual diversity, including the lack of gender, race and other diversity, we believe
contributed to the severity of the financial crisis through confirmation bias”. 7
The need to do more on gender diversity is not all about the numbers, but the numbers undoubtedly matter.
And this snapshot from our last Annual Report (see Annex) illustrates how we are getting on.
Since 2013, the proportion of women in senior management roles has almost doubled from 17% to a little
above 30%8. On our executive committee, which sits just below Deputy Governor level and is responsible
for day to day management of the organisation, we are split pretty much 50/50 men and women. We’ve also
seen our gender pay gap begin to narrow as progression of women into more senior ranks improves –
our mean gender pay gap dropped by a percentage point to 20.2% last year.

5

The Governor is not appointed by the Bank. The Chancellor makes a recommendation to the Prime Minister, who writes to
Her Majesty the Queen for approval.
6
See Hauser (2019).
7 See Sweeney (2019).
8
For a fuller account of the Bank’s progress on gender diversity, see Bank of England (2019) and Carney (2018).
3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches

3

Several factors have contributed to the progress we’ve made to date. Those include but are not limited to:
a consistently supportive tone from the top; a pooled approach to appointments at senior level 9;
a sponsorship programme; and a strong commitment to flexible working. The latter is something that I have
benefited from personally: I have worked part-time throughout my Bank career, and am currently one half of
the Bank’s first ever jobshare at Executive Director level.
None of that is to suggest, of course, that we are under any illusions at the Bank about how much more work
we have to do. There is no shortage of challenges ahead. But for all of us across the UK who are working
hard to make further progress on gender diversity, it is sometimes worth a brief pause to consider how far,
collectively, we have come.
So what of the future? I want to finish by highlighting the importance of the two big ‘Is’ – intersectionality,
and inclusion.
I believe it’s important that we don’t allow the debate on gender diversity to become a narrow discussion
about the promotion of white, middle-class women. Progress risks stalling unless we continue work to
address the unique challenges that different groups of women face. To ignore those would be to ignore the
important impact of intersectionality10 – for example, between gender and race, between gender and sexual
orientation or between gender and neurodiversity.
At the Bank, our fantastic employee networks – including our highly effective gender network
(known as ‘Women in the Bank’) – work with senior management on a wide range of issues. And that
includes on intersectionality. For example:


Our work at the Bank has shown that our ethnic minority colleagues do not always find the Bank as
inclusive an organisation as we would like. Aims of initiatives such as our sponsorship programme
include tackling some of the barriers that colleagues face. And to help us make further progress on
ethnic minority diversity and inclusion (male and female), we have recently established a BAME 11
Task Force, supported at the very highest levels of the Bank. The Task Force is led by Deputy
Governor Dave Ramsden12, its members include the three chairs of our ethnic minority network,
and it reports regularly into our governing board (the Bank’s Court of Directors).

9

Since summer 2018, we have been pooling vacancies in our senior management team, and look to appoint a cohort of
colleagues rather than to make appointments on an individual basis.
10 A term coined by Kimberelé Crenshaw, and which captures the interaction between different forms of inequality and
disadvantage, such as race and gender. See Crenshaw (1989).
11
Black, Asian and minority ethnic.
12 The responsibilities of the BAME Taskforce are outlined in Carney (2019).
4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches

4



Our thriving LGBT+ network is helping us – among other things – to understand more about the
challenges that our female LGBT+ colleagues may experience in the workplace, as well as about
how best to support colleagues who are transitioning gender or who identify as non-binary.
Our recent ‘Out and Proud’ charter13, our public commitment to fostering LGBT+ inclusion, is a signal
of the importance of these issues to us as an organisation.



We know that in society at large, autism and other aspects of neurodiversity are almost certainly
underdiagnosed in women and girls, and frequently misunderstood 14. Understanding more about the
challenges facing neurodiverse colleagues at work is among the areas where our disAbility network
– and specialist workplace mentors – are helping us make progress.



The Bank has for some time had a number of initiatives that speak to social mobility, such as our
long-standing community work programme. But we want to do more here, and our signing of the
Social Mobility Pledge15 is one illustration of our commitment. In the coming year, we want to invest
in a more consistent approach to measuring socio-economic background, as well as to participate in
an external research programme to understand better the interaction between social mobility and
characteristics such as gender and race.

How as leaders should we think about tackling the complex landscape that intersectionality brings? A large
part of the solution lies in that that second ‘I’, inclusion.
Ensuring diversity in the workplace is never, on its own, going to be enough. Our diverse and talented
employees can only ever reach their full potential if our culture is inclusive. As the Governor has said:
“Inclusiveness unlocks the true value of an organisation’s diversity” 16. We all need to feel comfortable being
ourselves in the workplace, and being valued and listened to for what we bring, rather than for our
background or upbringing.
In terms of how to build an inclusive culture, that is a whole summit in itself. But a personal reflection is that
inclusion begins at home. We all have a responsibility, particularly as we progress in our careers, to think
about how our own day to day actions and behaviours make others feel. And to broaden our minds by
actively seeking out and listening to those with backgrounds and world views very different to our own.
To conclude, for me a great example of how the gender diversity debate is changing – and how we are
building a more inclusive approach across banking and finance – is the active participation of men in the
gender diversity debate. Not only in encouraging and supporting female colleagues to join WIBF and attend

13

See Breeden (2019).
See, for example, Eaton (2017).
15
See https://www.socialmobilitypledge.org/.
16 See Carney (2017).
14

5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches

5

conferences like these. But, at least as importantly, taking an active role themselves, and it is great to see
that in the programme here today.
So thank you to our male allies in the room and beyond, as well as all the participants today. Thank you
– all of you – for your past work to improve gender diversity, and for your work in the present to ensure that
gender diversity remains a business imperative. Thank you also for all you will do in the future as we
collectively work together to ensure genuine equality of opportunity for all.

6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches

6

References
Bank of England (2017), ‘Women in the Bank: their history 1894 – 2017’, available at
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/news/2017/august/women-in-the-bank-booklet
Bank of England (2019) ‘Annual Report and Accounts’, available at
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/annual-report/2019
Breeden (2019), ‘Out and Proud - a noteworthy cause’, available at
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2019/sarah-breeden-speech-at-lgbt-the-network-of-networksbreakfast-at-the-bank-of-england
Carney (2017), ‘Reflecting diversity, choosing inclusion’, available at
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2017/reflecting-diversity-choosing-theinclusion.pdf
Carney (2018) ‘Letter to the Chair of the Treasury Committee July 2018’, available at
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/letter/2018/diversity-in-public-appointments
Carney (2019), ‘Letter to the Chair of the Treasury Committee March 2019’, available at
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/letter/2019/governor-letter-to-chair-of-tsc-re-diversity-atthe-bank-of-england.pdf?la=en&hash=D588207B004374CDF5E70C787A69922C701098FF
Courtney (Hogarth) (1926), ‘Recollected in Tranquillity’, Heinemann, London
Crenshaw (1989), ‘Demarginalizing the Intersection of Race and Sex: A Black Feminist Critique of
Antidiscrimination Doctrine, Feminist Theory, and Antiracist Politics’, University of Chicago Legal Forum, Vol.
1989, Issue 1, Article 8
Eaton (2017), ‘A Guide to Mental Health Issues in Girls and Young Women on the Autism Spectrum’,
Jessica Kingsley Publishers, London
Hauser (2019), ‘Why Diverse Markets need Diverse Talent’, available at
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2019/why-diverse-markets-need-diverse-talentspeech-by-andrew-hauser
Sweeney (2019), ‘Making Impactful Change’, available at
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2019/making-impactful-change-speech-by-annasweeney

7

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches

7

Annex: supporting materials

8

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches

9

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches

9

10

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches

10

