Bank of England

Page 1

A cost-of-living crisis: Inflation
during an unprecedented
terms of trade shock −
speech by Swati Dhingra
Given at the Resolution Foundation
08 March 2023

Bank of England

Page 2

Speech
For about two years, I have had the incredibly enriching opportunity of being part of the
Economy 2030 Inquiry, a collaboration between the Resolution Foundation and the
Centre for Economic Performance at LSE, where I am based. Economy 2030 is not simply
a project that seeks to describe and diagnose the economic problems facing Britain. It is
serious about providing solutions to create a fairer and more prosperous future. That
means recognising the context of a decade and a half of economic stagnation and being
realistic about the trade-offs that will have to be made to deliver concrete proposals for
change. I am therefore delighted to be invited by Resolution to deliver my first public
remarks on the cost-of-living crisis.
In this speech, I will first explain the unique features of today’s shock and the role of supply
chains in transmitting this through the UK economy. Second, I will analyse the direct and
indirect effects of higher energy prices on domestic price growth. I will note that energy
and other imports have a broad-based use in the CPI basket, and therefore the recent
period of high inflation is what we might expect from a large terms of trade shock. Third
and finally, I will review the outlook for inflation and discuss how this influences my current
monetary policy strategy. My conclusion is that, given little evidence of further cost-push
inflation, further tightening is a bigger risk to output and the medium-term inflation target.
The interim report of Economy 2030, published last summer, set the stage for what I will
discuss today. The report argues that managing the impact of inflation on families and
firms, and attempting to cool inflationary pressures without deepening any resulting
economic downturn, are immediate policy priorities. But, neither is going to be easy. The
scale of the terms of trade shock – that is, a sharp rise in the price of imports relative to the
price of our exports – and the inflationary pressure from it are unprecedented in the history
of the MPC (Chart 1). The steep increase since autumn 2021 in the imported price of
energy weighs on real incomes in this country, leading to an exceptional cost of living
crisis. And we have an absence of similar episodes to learn from. While oil shocks of the
1970s created a larger terms of trade deterioration, the nature of the global and domestic
economy have evolved a lot since that time. Shifts in bargaining power between economic
agents, and the emergence of global value chains as a dominant feature of world trade,
mean that shocks are likely to transmit differently. So, whilst history can provide useful
insights, the challenges of the 1970s were markedly distinct from today’s context.
The unique nature of this shock for the UK makes it difficult to apply lessons from
elsewhere. As Economy 2030 recognises, the context and trade-offs confronting us are
very different. Our transatlantic peers have seen their terms of trade improve because they
are net exporters of energy, notably of natural gas. Our European peers, like France or
Germany, share the pain of the energy crisis, but they have far outstripped us in

Bank of England

Page 3

productivity growth over the last decade. These structural differences mean we will have
to chart our own path to bring inflation down.

Chart 1: Purchasing Power of UK GDP
It is 2.1% lower from the Largest Terms of Trade Deterioration since the 1970s

Percentage points
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
-1.5
-2
-2.5
Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1
1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
Notes: Percentage point (pp) difference in 4-quarter growth rates of UK real Gross Domestic Income and real
Gross Domestic Product, Q1 1970 to Q3 2022. Source: ONS (2022).

The ability of monetary policy to curb inflationary pressures naturally depends on whether
we can influence the sources of inflation. As a small open economy and net importer of
energy, the UK is a price-taker for traded goods on global markets. So we have little
control over how much we are charged for energy by foreign providers. Our demand for
energy is highly inelastic and we have few immediate substitutes for it. Moreover, almost
every activity in the economy needs energy, so its price impacts are broad-based. Our
government can however influence how energy prices are set domestically and how much
families and firms have to pay for them. The Ofgem price cap and the government’s
energy price guarantee do this. The MPC has influence over further inflation arising as a
result of firms trying to re-build their margins and workers trying to defend their real
incomes through higher pay settlements.
Put differently, monetary policy cannot reduce our utility bills, but it can try to manage
aggregate demand in the face of a large terms of trade deterioration. By raising costs of
borrowing it can seek to address the risks of further domestically generated inflation.
Higher interest rates dampen economic activity and lower expectations of future price
inflation, but they come at the cost of deepening the economic downturn from already
squeezed budgets. We must therefore evaluate the evidence carefully to avoid creating

Bank of England

Page 4

excess volatility in the near term, unnecessary undershoots in inflation over the medium
term and output destruction at a time when the economy is already weak and more prone
to risks of undershooting the target.
The key question is whether monetary policy should be tighter and for how long to curb
domestic inflationary pressures. Today, I will examine this question by evaluating evidence
on how much different sources of inflationary pressures are driving consumer price
inflation and the outlook for their future evolution. The evidence informs policy by revealing
the constraints and trade-offs that would be involved in addressing the cost-of-living crisis.
Evidence on the Evolution of Inflation
Over a year has gone by since Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, by which point inflation had
already been above target for six months. About eighteen months of data on consumer
prices are therefore available to quantify the proximate sources of the cost-of-living crisis.
How much of inflation is driven by external factors such as energy? And how much is
driven by domestic factors, such as wage costs? The extent to which imported and
domestically generated inflation is driving above-target inflation speaks to the concerns
around persistence. The further that inflation overshoots the MPC’s target and the longer
this persists, the more likely it is to affect economic behaviour.
Understandably, if workers and firms in the economy are seeing their real incomes
squeezed due to the terms of trade shock and they expect this to persist, then they will
seek to claw back their losses through higher nominal earnings. But in a world where we
are all poorer, these actions will simply result in higher pay and price growth. So the risks
of inflation persistence coming from domestically generated pay and margin pressures, so
called “second-round” effects, are an important consideration for policy. But the relative
contributions of unit wage costs and margins to inflation can often be hard to measure with
standard data.
Based on national statistics and a long tradition of work on input-output linkages along the
supply chain, we decompose CPI inflation into the extent to which it is driven directly by
imports shares in final consumption and indirectly by cost pressures from energy, other
imported inputs, wages and residual profit margins that make up the price of consumer
items.1,2
To fix ideas, take the example of sliced white bread. The price of a loaf increased from
108p in January 2022 to 139p in January 2023.3 Bread became about 30 percent more
expensive. If we don’t import much sliced white bread, the contribution of final imports for
1

CPI refers to the Consumer Prices Index (2015=100) and CPI inflation to its 12-month rate.
For a summary of the history of input-output analysis, see Leontief (2008). For recent applications to
inflation, see Baqaee and Rubbio (2022) for a survey.
3 800g loaf of sliced white bread from ONS.
2

Bank of England

Page 5

household consumption would be zero. Then one observation might be that bread inflation
is driven purely by domestic bread prices, and therefore more needs to be done on
monetary tightening to try to weed out the inflationary pressures being generated at home.
But this does not account for the fact that the costs of making bread, like the price of
electricity and wheat flour, have themselves increased significantly. Wages of bakery
employees have also risen. If we count all these costs of the bakery, we can then examine
the difference between the unit price that the bakery charges and its per unit cost of
making the bread. This remainder surplus can be interpreted as the bakery’s profit margin,
which it retains as pure profit for its owners or investors, or uses to finance its investments.
The consumer price of bread can be decomposed into the costs of sellers and their
margins. This comes from a fundamental economic principle that:
Price of a product = Unit Costs of making the product + Residual Profit Margin from selling
the product
Little economic structure is imposed on the data to implement this price decomposition and
therefore robust answers can be provided for the proximate contributions of various factor
costs and profits to inflation. In economic parlance, the decomposition comes from an
identity and we are simply attributing what is left over, after accounting for all unit costs, to
profits.
Ideally, the price of every detailed product in the CPI basket, like sliced white bread, could
be decomposed in this way to examine where inflationary pressures are coming from.
However, data coverage and lags mean this is not feasible for every detailed product, but
it can be done for each of the 105 unique items (or groups of detailed products) in the CPI
basket. Therefore, even though a loaf of sliced white bread cannot be analysed
individually, manufacture of bakery products collectively can and it includes white sliced
bread along with other detailed baked products.
Chart 2 shows the cost components of all items in the CPI basket. Directly, households’
energy bills make up 3.6 percent of the CPI basket and imports (other than energy) for
final consumption make up 20.5 percent of the value of items in the CPI basket. The
remainder 75.9 percent are the share of domestic items (other than energy) that
households buy for final consumption.

Bank of England

Page 6

Chart 2: CPI Decomposition – Final
Energy, Other Imports and Domestic Factors

3.6%
20.5%

Energy
Domestic
Other imports

75.9%

Notes: Final Energy Bills, Final Consumption of Domestic and Imported Varieties (Other than Energy) as a
Share of Total Consumption of CPI Basket Items. The pie chart contains the share of energy, domestic
varieties (other than energy) and imported varieties (other than energy) for final consumption in the CPI
basket. Energy is the sum of the CPI weights items including coal, petroleum, natural gas and electricity.
Domestic and imported shares for items other than energy refer to the final consumption expenditure by
households from 2018 product by product direct use tables for each item and aggregated using CPI weights
of items.
Source: Authors’ calculations.

Domestic purchases by consumers form the bulk of the CPI basket, making it important to
understand the extent to which their prices are driven by domestic and external factors.
Even though few households directly source white bread from abroad, the ingredients in
white bread rely on energy and other imported inputs that increase the weight of external
factors in the CPI basket. In the example, bakeries often import palm oil and soya flour, to
add as ingredients in bread. The domestic and imported inputs and other factor costs
required to supply bread at home are also recorded in the national supply-use tables. They
tell us how much domestic sellers spend on energy, various domestic and imported inputs
(other than energy), labour and taxes, and the amount of the value of the product that is
left over as gross operating surplus (GOS) for the domestic seller.
Gross operating surplus contains the profits that the seller retains, having paid for energy
costs, imported inputs, domestic inputs, compensation of employees and taxes. This

Bank of England

Page 7

residual approach therefore lets us quantify profits, which are otherwise hard to measure
directly, and which could be a source of domestically-generated inflation through margin
building by firms.
Domestic sellers typically rely on upstream suppliers who provide the ingredients, such as
wheat flour, needed to provide bread to households. Domestic supply chains are an
important dimension for inflation and monetary policy. Price setting along the chain can
cause inflation persistence if suppliers keep building their own margins or do not pass on
their cost savings to downstream sellers. Indeed, (goods) producer price inflation reached
as high as 20pp in 2022. But this occurred soon after input prices of materials and fuel
purchased by domestic suppliers touched almost 25pp.
In the example, domestic mills that supply wheat flour to bakeries saw their own costs rise
because of increases in the price of wheat, which Ukraine is a large supplier of on global
markets. As a result, mills ended up with higher wheat and electricity costs, which must
also be accounted for as external factors indirectly contributing to bread price inflation.
Additionally, mills faced wage pressures to retain employees. Having accounted for all
these cost changes of the mill, the difference between the unit price of wheat flour and its
total unit cost can be inferred as the profit margin of the mill.
The behaviour of domestic suppliers has received some attention, particularly in the light
of windfall profits for some domestic companies. What is less appreciated though is the
consequence of domestic supply chains for the amplification of terms of trade losses for
consumers. This is an application of a well-known principle in international economics that
the rise of global value chains amplifies terms of trade losses because of accumulation
through the use of imported inputs at each stage of the supply chain.4 When the
cumulated terms of trade loss is evaluated as a share of domestically produced output,
there is further magnification in the rate of the terms of trade deterioration because
domestically produced content is a fraction of total output value.
Continuing with the example, inflation in bread prices is driven not just by costs incurred
directly by the bakery, but also by the costs of domestic inputs supplied by the mill and the
electricity generated by providers who power the bakery and the mill. Proceeding along the
domestic supply chain from downstream to upstream suppliers, bread price inflation can
be decomposed into costs from total energy use (including of the bakery, the mill that
supplies the wheat flour, and the electricity generators that use some of the natural gas in
the distribution of electricity that powers the bakery and the mill), the total imported input
costs (including the direct imports of palm oil and soya flour by the bakery, the indirect
imports of wheat by the mill), the total labour costs (of employees in the bakery, the mill

4

See Chapter 4 of World Bank (2017) for a survey.

Bank of England

Page 8

and at the electricity providers) and the profit margins (of the bakery, the mill and the
electricity provider).
To sum up, we can trace the contribution of all upstream costs in bread-making to arrive at
the proximate contributions of energy, imported inputs (other than energy), labour and
profits along the domestic supply chain of bread-making. Chart 3 accounts for domestic
supply chains and shows the cost and profit components in the value of the CPI basket,
together with the shares of final import shares of households’ energy bills and other
imports in consumption. While energy bills and other final imports made up less than a
quarter of the value of the CPI basket, this increases to over 40 percent because of the
use of energy and other imported inputs by domestic sellers and their domestic suppliers.
The supply-use tables therefore reveal that direct consumption weights underestimate the
extent to which the CPI basket relies on energy and other imports.5
Domestic unit labour costs are measured as average weekly earnings divided by gross
value added per worker for the sectors corresponding to each CPI item or input needed in
the CPI basket. They make up over a third of the value of the CPI basket through the
direct employment of staff in the bakery and the indirect employment of mill workers and
staff at electricity providers.6 And gross operating surplus, which includes the profits of
domestic sellers and suppliers, constitutes another quarter. Taxes are almost 2 percent,
but remain small in terms of absolute shares.

5

Costa et al. (2022) is closest in terms of examining import use for the whole economy, including services.
It is standard practice to consider unit labour costs – see Tenreyro (2020), which also contains a cost
decomposition.
6

Bank of England

Page 9

Chart 3: CPI Decomposition – Final & Total Use
Energy, Other Imports and Domestic Factors

8.6%
23.3%

Energy
Imports

1.8%

32.5%

Compensation of
employees
Taxes
GOS

33.9%

Notes: Final Energy Bills, Final Imports (other than Energy) for Household Consumption, Total Energy Costs,
Total Imported Input Costs (other than Energy), Total Labour Costs, Taxes and Domestic Profits as a Share
of Value of Output of CPI Basket Items. The pie chart contains the final energy consumption share of
households in the CPI basket, the share of final imports of each item for consumption by households, the
total energy used, the total use of imported inputs other than energy for making domestic consumer items,
compensation of employees, taxes less subsidies on products and production, and domestic gross operating
surplus in the value of output of the item at basic prices. The final consumption shares and cost shares are
computed from 2018 product by product direct use tables. Direct use tables are iterated to arrive at total
costs for each item. The final consumption and cost components of each item are aggregated using CPI
weights of items.
Source: Authors’ calculations

Having obtained the final consumption and total use shares, Chart 4 contains results for
the CPI decomposition after accounting for final energy consumption, final consumption of
imports (other than energy), total use contributions of energy, total use of imported inputs
(other than energy), total labour costs, taxes and domestic profits generated along the
domestic supply chain. Over 3pp of CPI inflation is from energy consumption and use.
Import shares for final household consumption, evaluated at consumer prices, make up
another 3.3pp of CPI inflation. Another 0.5-1pp is from the use of imported inputs in
domestic supply chains. The combined contribution of energy and imports was 7.1pp and
it rose over 2022 except at the very end in December when the sharp ascent of energy
prices slowed down.

Bank of England

Page 10

Chart 4: Energy, Other Imports & Domestic Factor Components in CPI Inflation
2011 Q1 to 2022 Q4

12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6

Pp. contribution to annual

2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Q1
Q1
Q1
Q1
Q1
Q1
Q1
Q1
Q1
Q1
Q1
Q1
Other imports
Energy
GOS
UWCs
Imports

Taxes

CPI

Notes: The bar chart contains the contributions of changes in final energy consumption of households, final
import consumption share of households, total energy costs, total costs of imported inputs (other than
energy), total unit labour costs (UWCs), taxes less subsidies on products and production, and domestic
gross operating surplus (GOS) to the 12-month CPI inflation rate. Cost contributions refer to the change in
the factor price in each quarter times the share of the factor from 2018 supply-use tables. Imported input
prices refer to each 2-digit CPA input. Unit labour costs are nominal wages divided by gross value added per
worker for each 2-digit CPA sector. Gross operating surplus is inferred from the difference between the
domestic CPI or the producer price for the item and the total unit costs of the item at that stage (energy
costs, domestic and imported input costs other than energy, unit labour costs and taxes). Final shares for
energy and other imports are from 2018 supply-use tables for each CPI item. Final consumption price of
other imports is set as the consumer price of the item. Contributions are calculated for each CPA 2-digit item
and aggregated using CPI weights of corresponding items.
Source: Authors’ calculations.

Labour has a large share in the costs of the CPI basket. The rise in unit labour costs make
up -1 to 1.5pp of CPI inflation over 2022. There is a small contribution from changes in
taxes. And the rest, 1.2 to 1.7pp of inflation, is driven by the profit margins that are
retained by domestic sellers and domestic suppliers.
The pandemic and the recovery period have seen countervailing shifts in the contributions
of wages and profits to inflation. This was a unique period with lockdowns and the furlough

Bank of England

Page 11

scheme in place, making it harder to define and measure labour productivity. To overcome
many of the difficult measurement issues due to the pandemic, it is instructive to compare
the contribution of different sources of inflation in 2022 with their pre-pandemic
contributions. Chart 5 shows that domestically generated inflation from wages and profits,
made up a little over 4pp out of the 17pp rise in the CPI index between 2019Q4 and
2022Q4.
Chart 5: CPI Decomposition – Percentage Point Contributions
Energy, Other Imports and Domestic Factors
Pp. contribution to % change between 2019Q4 and 2022Q4
18
16

Taxes

14

GOS

12

Imports

10

UWCs

8

Energy

6

Other imports

4

CPI

2
0
Notes: The bar chart contains the contributions of changes in final energy consumption of households, final
import consumption of households, total energy costs, total costs of imported input (other than energy), unit
labour costs (UWCs), taxes less subsidies on products and production, and domestic gross operating
surplus (GOS) to the rise in the CPI index from 2019 Q4 to 2022 Q4. Cost contributions refer to the change
in the factor price in each quarter times the share of the factor from 2018 supply-use tables. Imported input
prices refer to each 2-digit CPA input. Unit labour costs are nominal wages divided by gross value added per
worker for each 2-digit CPA sector. Gross operating surplus is inferred from the difference between the
domestic CPI or the producer price for the item and the total unit costs of the item at that stage (energy
costs, domestic and imported input costs other than energy, unit labour costs and taxes). Final shares for
energy and other imports are from 2018 supply-use tables for each CPI item. Final consumption price of
other imports is set as the consumer price of the item. Contributions are calculated for each CPA 2-digit item
and aggregated using CPI weights of corresponding items.
Source: Authors’ calculations.

Summing up, external factors – energy and imports – have been the dominant sources of
inflation since it rose above the 2 percent target in August 2021. And they continued to be
the main sources all through 2022, revealing our precarious dependence on critical inputs
and consumption items for which few substitutes are available to us at home. Domestically

Bank of England

Page 12

generated inflation was 0.5 to 3.2pp in 2022, with a rise from a negative contribution to
about 1pp each quarter. The contributions of labour and profits to domestically generated
inflation counteracted each other during the pandemic and recovery period. By the end of
the period, nominal wages and profit margins had an almost equal share in their
contributions to inflation. Wages and profits have evolved differently throughout the
inflationary episode. With wages and margins co-moving in countervailing directions in
some periods, wage growth is not a sufficient statistic for the aggregate losses from a
terms of trade shock or for domestically generated inflation. It reflects the losses or
nominal gains for the individual group of economic agents. This suggests that policy rules
which focus on wage growth are measuring the evolution of the division of the terms of
trade losses, not the aggregate losses for the economy.
Along with wage growth, a greater emphasis is being placed in monetary policy
assessments on examining inflation measures, other than headline inflation, to better
gauge the pressures from domestically-generated inflation. Headline inflation confounds
external and domestic sources of inflation. For example, CPI does not distinguish between
domestic and imported varieties of an item, though three-quarters of the basket contains
domestic final consumption and many domestic and imported prices co-move because
they are set globally. A larger weight is therefore being placed in policy assessments on
measures such as core inflation (which strips out volatile elements like energy and
commodities), services inflation (due to its higher share of domestic factors like labour and
profits) and core services inflation.
However, because of the pervasive role of energy as an input in the modern economy,
these measures have also increased significantly due to the energy price surge. Take
catering services as an example, which last year showed sharp price increases. While a
large part of catering costs are wages paid to staff, energy and food imports are also
important cost components. Examining the measures of core and services inflation reveals
that this is in fact the case for these other measures of inflation too. Charts 6a, 6b and 6c
show that energy and other imported inputs explain over 60 percent of core inflation,
services inflation and core services inflation. The contribution of external factors is not
much under the 71 percent for headline consumer price inflation and even higher in fact for
core services inflation.
While these three measures of inflation may appear to be purely domestic measures
because most consumers do not import them, final consumption is no longer the dominant
channel for international trade. A massive rise in fragmentation of production within and
across borders means that supply chains are key to how terms of trade shocks transmit
themselves in the domestic economy. The three measures of core, services and core
services inflation are therefore no longer pure measures of domestically-generated
inflation. Their imported content is substantial and increases in the measures in the past
year have been largely driven by the deterioration in the terms of trade.

Bank of England

Page 13

Chart 6: Decomposition of “Pure Domestic” Consumer Price Inflation Measures
a) Core CPI
Pp. contribution to annual rate

10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8

2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1
Other imports

UWCs

Energy

Taxes

GOS

CPI

Imports

b) Services CPI
Pp. contribution to
13
8
3
-2
-7
-12
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1
UWCs
Energy
Imports
Other imports
Taxes

GOS

CPI

Bank of England

Page 14

c) Core Services CPI
Pp. contribution to annual
12
8
4
0
-4
-8
-12
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1
UWCs
Energy
Imports
Other imports
Taxes
GOS
Core services CPI

Notes: The bar chart contains the contributions of changes in final energy consumption of households, final
import consumption of households, total energy costs, total costs of imported input (other than energy), unit
labour costs (UWCs), taxes less subsidies on products and production, and domestic gross operating
surplus (GOS) to the 12-month CPI inflation rate for core items, services and core services. Cost
contributions refer to the change in the factor price in each quarter times the share of the factor from 2018
supply-use tables. Imported input prices refer to each 2-digit CPA input. Unit labour costs are nominal wages
divided by gross value added per worker for each 2-digit CPA sector. Gross operating surplus is inferred
from the difference between the domestic CPI or the producer price for the item and the total unit costs of the
item at that stage (energy costs, domestic and imported input costs other than energy, unit labour costs and
taxes). Final shares for energy and other imports are from 2018 supply-use tables for each CPI item. Final
consumption price of other imports is set as the consumer price of the item. Contributions are calculated for
each CPA 2-digit item and aggregated using CPI weights of corresponding items.
Source: Authors’ calculations.

Overall, the decomposition exercises show over 70 percent of CPI inflation in 2022 could
be accounted for by increases in energy and import prices. This is what might be expected
in the face of a large terms of trade shock from energy and commodity prices. There have
naturally been concerns for over a year now that the scale of the rise could result in further
inflationary pressure from domestic price and wage negotiations. But as of now, about 30
percent of CPI inflation can be attributed to increases in unit labour costs. Workers and
firms have shared about equally in the later part of 2022 because of higher nominal pay
settlements and some margin rebuilding.
As with any data exercise, especially one that puts together various data sources for the
whole economy, we can examine the upside and downside risks to the findings reported

Bank of England

Page 15

here. A first key avenue to understand in future work would be how much substitutability of
foreign inputs is feasible in the short term and how that might alleviate some of the
inflationary pressures. Being able to substitute to lower cost alternatives is one way that
consumers have already been trying to make their budgets stretch further. This is in fact
captured in the price quotes that underlie the CPI. They reveal moreover that lower cost
alternatives started to see sharper growth in this inflationary episode. 7
But the price statistics do not capture substitutability across CPI items or across factors of
production. The exercise holds spending shares across items and inputs fixed because it
relies on supply-use tables which are updated with a lag. The main news in spending
shares implies that we are likely to be overestimating domestically generated inflation
because the weight of energy bills in the consumer basket has risen from 3.6 percent to
4.8 percent in 2023. If the terms of trade shock dissipates as expected, a bigger share of
energy bills would mechanically reduce inflation faster than accounted for in the
decomposition.
Firms may also be moving towards alternative sources of energy or substituting energy
inputs with other factors of production, like labour. To the extent that they have already
done so, domestically generated inflation should be higher but is then more likely to reflect
business investments in alternatives rather than pure profits. If instead firms have not been
able to reduce their reliance on energy and other imported inputs, they would have
incurred higher expenses to meet these increased costs and again inflation would be
expected to fall faster because the share of external factors would be higher now (than
that recorded in the pre-pandemic period). The most recent monetary policy report
presents data indicating that, since October last year, the demand for gas at a given
temperature has been lower than in previous years. This could suggest demand
substitution from energy to other goods. There is some corroboration of this data trend
from Bank Agents’ intelligence. Some firms are looking to invest in greater energy
efficiency in response to marked cost inflation, and in a few cases have substituted away
from energy consumption. But the evidence is tentative at this stage.
The decomposition is based on a residual profits approach and therefore cannot provide a
clear demarcation between where the impact, rather than the incidence, of inflation is.
For example, if energy prices are guaranteed to be below a threshold, then the
decomposition would rightly reflect that in lower consumer prices. If the government
subsidises energy prices for firms, then it would also show up rightly as reduced costs for
them. The government is compensating energy suppliers for providing energy at
below-market prices, and the decomposition does not include this transfer payment to
energy suppliers. Estimates suggest that £9bn has been spent on the EPG in Q4 last year.
That compares with nominal consumer spending of around £390bn in the same quarter.

7

Davies (2022).

Bank of England

Page 16

This means that we are underestimating profitability by a relatively small 2 percent of the
value of the CPI basket.
A related point is that because the decomposition infers profits as a residual, it does not
distinguish between pure profits and profits that are needed to finance future investments.
This is an important question but one that is a difficult area for further research because
distinguishing profit margins by motive of firm spending is typically not directly feasible
from standard data sources. In terms of its implications for domestically generated
inflation, that magnitude would not change irrespective of where the profits are spent. But
it might be expected that if the spending was on investments then supply capacity would
increase over time.
Nonetheless, it is likely that we are overestimating domestically generated inflation
because the CPI does not separate final import prices and these are expected to have
risen faster, which would increase the external price contribution of final imported varieties
of items other than energy.
There is reason to also think that we might be overestimating labour costs relative to
profits. National supply-use tables record compensation of employees (which includes
non-wage costs such as employers’ national income contributions and pension
contributions) and some components of compensation do not rise much in short spans. So
weighting average weekly earnings growth by compensation overestimates the rise in unit
labour costs.
Finally, better quality and more granular data typically helps improve the mapping across
different datasets and provides more accuracy. Fortunately, the key data sources used in
the analysis, such as the supply-use tables, price statistics and wages, follow similar
classification systems or have precise mappings to each other. They are also done at the
level of granularity that does not shrink sample sizes to unreliable levels. That being said,
improved price statistics that enable tracing out prices at which items are bought and sold
at each stage in the supply chain would be ideal for a decomposition exercise. We hope
that as the ability to link up various administrative data sources and national statistics
opens up, there can be progress on this but it remains a nascent topic of research and
policy.
Overall, the magnitude of domestically generated inflation is if anything likely to be smaller
than we estimate for the reasons discussed above, and the division between external
factors and profits is relatively nuanced as a result. The main robust finding is that sharp
increases in costs from the terms of trade shock have been the dominant source of
headline inflation, even towards the end of 2022. Pass-through of domestic factor costs,
including wages and margins, into inflation has been subdued relative to the scale of the

Bank of England

Page 17

terms of trade shock. Will these trends from last year continue or should we expect them
to reverse?
The Future Evolution of Inflation
Inflation is expected to fall sharply over 2023. Based on a mechanical calculation, we can
be sure that this will happen if we do not see further cost increases of magnitudes similar
to those that resulted from the war in Ukraine. For energy costs, this is hard to predict, but
the recent experience over the winter gives some hope for the coming months and with
some uncertainty, possibly over the next winter.
What then could prevent inflation from falling to target over the medium term? Many point
to the tight labour market and firms’ desire to rebuild margins. Inflation has been well
above target for over a year now, but our decomposition shows that wages and margins
have played a relatively smaller role than the broad-based terms of trade deterioration.
Nonetheless, the longer this high inflation persists, the more likely it could become
embedded due to domestically generated pay and margin pressures.
Private sector wage growth is high in the light of recent history. It has lagged the squeeze
on household budgets despite a tight labour market that is possibly suffering from greater
skills mismatch after the lockdown and the adjustment to a quick bounce back. However,
the labour market responds relatively slowly to changes in monetary policy, typically
lagging downturns in activity – for example, as firms hoard labour8. Furthermore, key
labour market data for wages and unemployment are published with a lag. Therefore, the
signal for monetary policy from these lagging indicators is hard to assess. More timely
indicators – such as the Rec survey – and the Bank’s Agency intelligence suggest that
moving forwards, a flattening off in wage growth and, in some cases, dampening will occur
in the near term. Accordingly, medium-term inflation expectations for households, firms
and financial market participants have continued to gradually decline. These signals about
the future path of wage growth suggest there will not be persistent inflationary pressure
from real wage resistance.
With the labour market starting to turn and the cost of living crisis taking hold on
disposable incomes, Agency intelligence also confirms that firms are finding it difficult to
pass through fully existing cost rises to consumer prices. This is also apparent from
national statistics on firm’s pricing in the past. For example, when goods input PPIs fell
back on the month in December, their output PPIs also moved in the same direction.
Therefore, it appears that firms are sensitive to decreasing as well as increasing input
prices.

8

Bank of England (2023).

Bank of England

Page 18

A weak demand outlook in the future is expected to reinforce this. Tighter credit conditions
and the cost of living crisis have already led to weak GDP growth and a recent slowdown
in the housing market. The value of additional accumulated savings during the pandemic
has also been largely depleted. Consumption remains much below pre-pandemic levels
and it is hard to see where substantial renewed demand pressures could come from,
particularly as the effects of monetary tightening start to also play a bigger role in
dampening economic activity.
The Bank has already raised interest rates by 390 basis points since December 2021. It is
well established that monetary policy affects the real economy with long, variable and
somewhat unpredictable lags. Estimates generally indicate that, following a lagged effect
on output, monetary policy takes well over a year to affect inflation.9 Rate hikes take time
to get passed through from financial markets to households and firms who determine
consumer prices.10 Going forwards, there is reason to expect therefore that demand will be
subdued and not inflame inflation further.
Overall, the evidence does not point to persistent cost-push inflation becoming embedded
in wages and margins. Even after a year and a half of above-target inflation, there is little
evidence for such cost-push inflation beyond what might be expected following an
unprecedented terms of trade shock. Consumption remains weak and many of the
tightening effects of monetary policy are yet to fully take hold.
Overtightening poses a more material risk at this point, through potential negative impacts
from increased borrowing costs and reduced supply capacity going forwards. It risks
unnecessarily denting output at a time when the economy is weak and deepening the pain
for households when budgets are already squeezed through energy and housing costs.
Recent research indicates the persistent scarring effects of deep contractions associated
with monetary policy tightening and energy market disruptions11, indicating the harmful
consequences of overtightening. Such an approach would increase the downside risks of
missing the inflation target in the medium term. In my view, a prudent strategy would hold
policy steady amidst growing signs external price pressures are easing, and be prepared
to respond to developments in price evolution. This would avoid overtightening and return
the economy sustainably to our 2% inflation target in the medium-term.

9

Cloyne and Hürtgen (2016).
There has been some discussion that pass-through may be higher this time, largely based on how mortgage
rates responded immediately after the mini-Budget. Indeed, new mortgages have seen almost full passthrough compared to the usual 70 percent over three months from increases in Bank Rate. However, the usual
forecasting rules already account for high and quick pass-through for other types of credit rates including
mortgages on reversion rates, tracker mortgages and various corporate loans. There has also been slightly
lower pass-through than usual in interest-bearing sight deposit rates.
11 Aikman et al (2022).
10

Bank of England

Page 19

The views expressed in this speech are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or
the Monetary Policy Committee.
I co-wrote this speech with Jack Page. We are grateful to Katie Taylor for initial work on
this research, Steve James at the ONS for making the data available, to Marilena Angeli,
Oliver Davies, Douglas Rendle and Bradley Speigner for detailed discussions. We have
benefited from comments from Andrew Bailey, Thomas Belsham, Natalie Burr, Andrew
Gaffney, Jonathan Haskel, Josh Martin, Michael McLeay, Huw Pill and Silvana Tenreyro.
References
Aikman, D, M Drehmann, M Juselius and X Xing, 2022, The scarring effects of deep
contractions, BIS Working Paper, 1043.
Bakker, J, N Datta, R Davies and J De Lyon, 2022. Non-tariff Barriers and Consumer
Prices: Evidence from Brexit, CEP Discussion Paper CEPDP1888.
Bank of England, 2023, Monetary Policy Report.
Baqaee, D and E Rubbio, 2022. Micro Propagation and Macro Aggregation,
Forthcoming in Annual Review of Economics.
Cloyne, J, and P Hürtgen. 2016. The Macroeconomic Effects of Monetary Policy: A
New Measure for the United Kingdom, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 8
(4): 75-102.
Costa, R, S Dhingra, S Machin, 2022. New Dawn Fades: Trade, Labour and the Brexit
Exchange Rate Depreciation, CEP Discussion Paper, CEPDP1890.
Davies, R, 2022. Is Inflation Avoidable? Economics Observatory, 5 September.
Leontief, W, 2008. Input-Output Analysis, in The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics,
Palgrave Macmillan, London.
Office for National Statistics (ONS), released 8 February 2023. ONS website, article, The
Purchasing Power of GDP: UK 2022.
Resolution Foundation and Centre for Economic Performance, LSE, 2022. Stagnation
nation: Navigating a route to a fairer and more prosperous Britain, Resolution
Foundation, July.
Tenreyro, S, 2020. Monetary policy during pandemics: inflation before, during and
after Covid-19, Bank of England, 16 April.

Bank of England

Page 20

World Bank, 2017. Global value chain development report 2017: measuring and
analyzing the impact of GVCs on economic development, International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank, Washington DC.

