A Picture of European Unemployment: Success and Failure
Speech given by
Stephen Nickell, Bank of England Monetary Policy Committee and London School of
Economics

At the OECD, Paris
26 March 2004

I would like to thank Ryan Banerjee and Luca Nunziata for their assistance in the preparation of this
paper. The data used in this paper may be found attached to CEP Discussion Paper 502 at
http://cep.lse.ac.uk/papers/.
Speech is an updated version of that previously given in Munich in December 2002.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Abstract
A Picture of European Unemployment: Success and Failure

Average unemployment in Europe today is relatively high compared with OECD
countries outside Europe. The majority of countries in Europe today have lower
unemployment than any OECD country outside Europe, including the US. These two
facts are consistent because the four largest countries in Continental Western Europe
namely, France, Germany, Italy, Spain, (the Big Four), have very high unemployment
and most of the rest have comparatively low unemployment. This variability is highly
informative because the fifteen European countries which we consider have more or
less independent labour markets in practice, despite “free” movement of labour.
Using this information we see how changes in the structure of the various labour
markets explain a substantial proportion of the secular fluctuations in unemployment
in the various countries. In particular, we pin down some of the particular factors
which enable us to understand why some European countries have been able fully to
recover from the unemployment disasters of the early 1980s whereas some have not.
JEL Classification: J64
Keywords: unemployment, institutions

1. Introduction
The average unemployment rate in Europe in 2001 was 7.6%. This is higher
than in any of the developed countries of the OECD outside Europe1. Interestingly,
the inactivity rate in Europe has exactly the same property. So, in this average sense,
there is a European unemployment problem. But averaging in this way is silly.
Europe, by which we mean Western Europe, consists of fifteen countries (we omit
Luxembourg) with fifteen more or less independent labour markets. As we shall see,
it is how these labour markets operate which determines unemployment over the
longer term. And by 2002, nine of these fifteen labour markets were operating well
enough to produce unemployment rates lower than in any of the non-European
developed OECD countries including the US. So why is average unemployment in
Europe so high? The answer is that unemployment is high in the four largest
economies of Continental Western Europe, namely France, Germany, Italy and Spain.
Exclude these four countries and the famous European unemployment problem more
or less disappears.
In what follows, we pursue these issues. In the next section, we present an
overview of labour supply in the developed OECD countries simply to set the scene
for our analysis of unemployment. Then in Section 3, we discuss how we might
explain large secular shifts in unemployment and the circumstances in which changes
in the operation of the labour market would provide such an explanation. In Section 4
we discuss which labour market institutions might be expected to relate to
unemployment over the longer term and then, in Section 5, we summarise some of the
evidence on this issue. Finally, in Section 6, we look at what has actually happened to
labour market institutions in the last four decades in our group of OECD countries.
Then we see whether we can explain the significant differences in unemployment
performance across Europe since the early 1980s.
2.

An Overall picture of Labour Supply

Although we shall be concentrating on unemployment in what follows, it is
Table 1 here

helpful to look at some more general background information on various aspects of
labour supply. In Table 1, we present the aggregate picture in 2001 and 2002. Taking
the very latest unemployment data, the first striking point, which we have already
noted, that there is not a European unemployment problem. Most European
economies have lower levels of unemployment than the OECD countries outside
Europe including the United States. The problem lies in the large countries of
1

Continental Western Europe, namely France, Germany, Italy, Spain, henceforward
referred to as the Big Four. Of the other eleven countries of Western Europe in the
table, nine currently have relatively low unemployment2, the exceptions being
Belgium and Finland. By and large, the European countries with high unemployment
rates tend to have high inactivity rates and low employment rates as well. The Big
Four and Belgium all have employment rates below 66 per cent with only Ireland of
the rest joining this group. With the exception of Germany, the Big Four, Belgium
and Ireland also have inactivity rates in excess of 30 per cent.
A second point worth noting is the pattern of long-term unemployment rates
Table 2 here

(over 12 months), set out in Table 2. Here we see that while the short-term
unemployment rate in the European Union is relatively low at 4.3%, the long-term
rate far exceeds that outside Europe. The Big Four and Belgium all have long-term
unemployment rates between 3% and 6%, many times the equivalent rates of the nonEuropean countries. High long-term rates obviously reflect barriers to re-entry into
the job market, once having lost a job.

Table 3 here

In Tables 3 and 4, we present unemployment, inactivity and employment rates
for a variety of sub-groups of the working age population to illustrate the wide
variations in the patterns across age and gender groupings. Focussing first on prime
age men (age 25-54), we see that even among this group, in most countries more are
inactive than are unemployed. Furthermore, the inactivity rate in this group is higher
in the US than in the European Union. Interestingly, most inactive men in this age

Table 4 here

group are classified as sick or disabled, the majority of whom are claiming some form
of state benefit. Furthermore, the size of this disability group has risen substantially
since the 1970s in nearly every country, and in those which have been analysed, this
increase has been driven by changes in the entry rules and the available benefits (see
Bound and Burkhauser, 1999, for some evidence).
Among older men, unemployment rates are generally much the same as for
prime age men, but inactivity rates are enormously larger and vary dramatically from
one country to another. In some European countries, more than half the older men
are inactive, whereas in Norway and Sweden, the inactivity rate is closer to one
quarter. As Blondal and Scarpetta (1998) note, these large cross-country variations
were not apparent as recently as 1971, when nearly all the countries had inactivity
rates for this group below 20 per cent, the major exception being Italy with a rate of
41 per cent, (see Blondal and Scarpetta, 1998, Table V.1, p.72). The main factor
2

explaining the current variations and the consequent large changes since 1971 has
been the structure of the social security system. Incentives for men to stay in the
labour force vary widely, with generous incentives to retire early being introduced in
many countries. This was often done in order to reduce labour supply in the mistaken
view that this would help to resolve the problem of unemployment. As a
consequence, with the exception of Spain, all of the Big Four and Belgium have
exceptionally high inactivity rates among older men on top of their exceptionally high
unemployment rates.
Inactivity rates among women aged 25 to 54 also vary widely, with the
Scandinavian countries having the lowest rates in the OECD, and Italy and Spain
having the highest. While the majority of inactive women in this age group report
themselves as looking after their family, Italy and Spain also have the lowest fertility
rates in the OECD. What is important here is the structure of the tax system,
particularly the marginal tax rate facing wives when their husbands work3, and the
existence of barriers to part-time work.
Finally, it is worth noting how unemployment in Italy, Spain and to a lesser
extent France is heavily concentrated among young people and women. This is partly
due to the role of employment protection laws in generating barriers to employment
for new entrants and partly due to the social mores surrounding entry into work. For
example, in Italy many young people, particularly if they are well qualified, will live
at home for many years without working but effectively queuing for a particularly
desirable job and contributing to measured unemployment (although perhaps not to
true unemployment).
Overall, therefore, it is clear that the unemployed are not the only relevant
group when it comes to analysing labour supply. Indeed, it is generally the case that
there are significant flows into employment from the inactive which are, in many
countries, as large as the flows from unemployment. But there are many more
inactive than unemployed, so the probability per period that an unemployed person
gets a job is generally several times higher than the probability per period that an
inactive person gets a job. Thus the unemployed are the significant group of potential
suppliers of labour since they are the group who are actively searching for and
obtaining work at a substantial rate. So, in the remainder of what follows, this is the
group on which we shall focus.
3. Explaining Secular Shifts in Unemployment
3

Before discussing how we might explain why unemployment changes such a
lot over time, we start with a general picture of the period from 1960 presented in
Table 5. Note that in this table, the numbers for Germany refer to West Germany and
the numbers for Italy have been subject to some correction described in the table.
Both these changes have been made to try and ensure some degree of consistency
over time. Looking at the table, we see that unemployment was very low in the 1960s
with the notable exceptions of Canada, Ireland and the United States. Today, there is
only one country with unemployment lower than in the early 1960s, namely Ireland,
although Austria, Netherlands, Norway, Switzerland and the US have seen very small
increases over what were very low levels in the case of the first four countries. By
contrast, the Big Four have unemployment today far in excess of its level in the early
1960s. Like most countries, their unemployment rates took off in the late 1970s and
early 1980s but unusually they have remained high ever since. Thse patterns are the
main focus of our interest, so how might this be explained?
Some Basic Analysis
The level of employment, and hence unemployment, is determined by
aggregate demand5. This is influenced by many factors, mostly outside the direct
control of policy makers. Monetary policy is, however, directly controlled by policy
makers and has a significant impact on aggregate demand. These days, monetary
policy tends to be set in order to stabilise inflation at relatively low levels. Suppose,
as a result of adverse shocks, aggregate demand is low, unemployment is high and the
economy is in a recession. Then monetary policy will be loosened, aggregate demand
will recover and unemployment will start falling. At some point in this recovery, the
economy will run into labour shortages and inflationary pressure. In anticipation of
inflation moving above target, monetary policy is then tightened. They key issue is
how much unemployment remains before labour shortages become excessive and
inflation starts to rise. This level of unemployment may be thought of as the
equilibrium or sustainable rate at which there is no systematic tendency for inflation
to rise or fall, (so it is also called the NAIRU).
Table 5 here

By and large, variations in this equilibrium rate of unemployment, through
time and across countries, will lie behind the broad patterns of unemployment we
observe in Table 5. So explaining the equilibrium rate is the key problem. Of course,
aggregate demand determines unemployment, so variations in aggregate demand
(relative to trend) will “explain” precisely the observed patterns of unemployment.
4

But this is more of a tautology than an explanation. A country will suffer from
persistently high unemployment, that is persistently “low” aggregate demand, if its
equilibrium level of unemployment is high. Because then, any attempt to raise
aggregate demand and hence lower unemployment will run into the inflation
constraint. For example, in the UK in the late 1980s, aggregate demand rose rapidly
from 1986 and unemployment fell from 11.2% in that year to 8.6% in 1988 and 7.2%
in 1989. Unfortunately, over the same period retail price inflation rose from 3.4% in
1986 to 4.9% in 1988 and 7.8% in 1989. Monetary policy was tightened dramatically
and the short-term interest rate rose from around 8 per cent in the spring of 1988 to 15
per cent by the winter of 1989. Unemployment increased from its low point of 6.9%
in 1990 to a high of 10.2% in 1993 as the direct consequence of this monetary
tightening. It is clear from these data that equilibrium unemployment must have been
well above the 1990 low point because inflation was rising quite rapidly well before
this point was reached. By contrast, in the late 1990s, UK unemployment fell well
below this 1990 low point with no inflationary consequences whatever, suggesting a
significant decline in equilibrium unemployment.
Table 6 here

A second interesting example is the Eurozone in the late 1990s. The Eurozone
is, of course, dominated in size by the big four Continental European economies,
France, Germany, Italy and Spain. A picture of events for 1994-2002 is set out in
Table 6. As a general rule of thumb, monetary policy, as captured by short-term
interest rates, impacts on demand with a lag of about a year and on inflation in a
further year. Early in the period, monetary policy was quite tight, domestic demand
growth was relatively modest, unemployment was nearly 11% and the inflation rate
was falling. Monetary policy was eased during the late 1990s, domestic demand
growth expanded and unemployment started falling. However, by early 2000,
inflation had started to move above the ECB target range6 even though unemployment
was still above 8%. As a consequence, monetary policy was tightened throughout
2000. Despite subsequent easing, particularly in late 2001, domestic demand fell
rapidly from the second half of 2000 and unemployment started to rise from a low
point of 7.8% in late 20017. Despite this, inflation remains above the ECB target
range. The lesson from this episode appears to be that in the Eurozone, the reduction
in unemployment generated by monetary policy easing in the late 1990s hit the
inflation constraint in 2000 and monetary policy had to be tightened to stop inflation
rising further. This prevented Eurozone unemployment falling much below 8%. On
5

the basis of this example, it is hard to see how average equilibrium unemployment in
the Eurozone can be below 8%, a relatively high level, particularly as unemployment
in most of the small Eurozone countries has been well below this level for many
years.
Can Unemployment Deviate from its Equilibrium Level for Long Periods?
These are typical examples of how actual unemployment fluctuates around its
equilibrium level. But it is not always like this. On some occasions, countries may
suffer from high levels of unemployment for long periods of time either because they
experience an overwhelming adverse demand shock from which it takes a very long
time to recover or because macroeconomic policy is persistently perverse. In the
former case, we may observe unemployment well above its equilibrium rate, although
falling back towards it. In this case inflation may not fall, although unemployment is
above its equilibrium rate, because the very fact that unemployment is falling will
itself typically generate upward inflationary pressure. This offsets the downward
inflationary pressure produced by the high level of unemployment8. In the latter case,
unemployment which is kept above its equilibrium rate will tend simply to generate
falling inflation. Good examples of these two cases are provided by Finland and
Japan. In Finland, a combination of poor policy decisions including a mishandled
deregulation of the financial sector produced a huge adverse demand shock in the
early 1990s which was reinforced by the collapse of trade with the Soviet Union.
Consequently, as we can see in Table 7, unemployment rose from 3.2% to 16.4% in
three years. From 1994 onwards, unemployment has fallen steadily without any
serious inflationary consequences. This is a good example of unemployment being
above the equilibrium rate for a decade but steadily falling back, simply as the
consequence of an enormous adverse demand shock.
The example of Japan is different. From 1990 on, unemployment has been

Table 7 here

rising throughout and, with a brief hiccup, inflation has been falling, turning negative
in 1999. This suggests that unemployment has been above the equilibrium rate for a
long time which equally suggests that something has gone wrong on the macro policy
front.
Aside from these types of exceptions, the longer-term patterns of
unemployment tend to be dominated by shifts in the equilibrium rate. One way of
checking on this is to look at two groups of European countries. In the first group are
France, Germany, Italy, Spain, the Big Four. In the second group are Denmark,
6

Netherlands and the UK. From Table 5, we see that unemployment in the period
1973-79 was much the same in all these countries. Then in the 1980s unemployment
rose substantially, again in all these countries. But by 2000-01, unemployment in the
Big Four remained around twice as high as in the 1973-79 period. By contrast, in the
second group, unemployment was roughly the same in 2000-01 as in 1973-79. This
suggests that equilibrium unemployment is much higher today in the Big Four than it
was in 1973-79 whereas, in the second group, equilibrium unemployment is today at
roughly the same level as in the 1970s. We can see this clearly by looking at the
relationship between unemployment and vacancies (the Beveridge Curve). When
vacancies are high, unemployment should be relatively low, because it is easy for
unemployed people to find work. Yet, strikingly, in France, West Germany and Spain
vacancies in recent years have been extremely high by historical standards, despite
high unemployment. (There are no vacancy data for Italy.) It is this high level of
vacancies which helped to generate increasing European inflation in 1999/2000,
which led to higher interest rates and the end of the European recovery, as we have
already noted. This situation is shown in Figure 1. In all three countries vacancies in
2000/1 were far higher than in the late 1970s. One might have expected
unemployment in 2000/1 to be lower. But, in fact, it was more than double, as we
have already noted.
In the second group of countries shown in Figure 2, we see that just as in the
Fig. 2 here

first group, unemployment rose significantly relative to vacancies in the 1980s. But,
in the 1990s, in contrast to the Big Four, there was a backward shift in unemployment
relative to vacancies so that by the end of the 1990s, the unemployment/vacancy loci
were back at their 1975 positions.
So on the basis of these arguments, we may conclude that, aside from some
notable exceptions, the secular shifts in unemployment which we have seen are driven
by shifts in the equilibrium rate, the major exceptions in the 1990s being Finland and
Japan. So the next step is to discuss the factors which impact on the equilibrium
unemployment rate.
4. The Determinants of the Equilibrium Rate
There are innumerable detailed theories of unemployment in the long run.
These may be divided into two broad groups, those based on flow models and those
based on stock models. Pissarides (1990) and Mortensen and Pissarides (1999)
provide good surveys of the former model type. Blanchard and Katz (1999) presents
7

a general template for the latter models. Fundamentally, all the models have the same
broad implications. The equilibrium level of unemployment is affected first, by any
variable which influences the ease with which unemployed individuals can be
matched to available job vacancies, and second, by any variable which tends to raise
wages in a direct fashion despite excess supply in the labour market. There may be
variables common to both sets. Finally, both groups of variables will tend to impact
on real wages in the same direction as they influence equilibrium unemployment,
essentially because equilibrium labour demand, which is negatively related to wages,
has to move in the opposite direction to equilibrium unemployment.
Before going on to consider these variables in more detail, it is worth noting
that the first group of variables mentioned above will tend to impact on the position of
the unemployment/vacancy locus or Beveridge Curve, whereas the second will not do
so in any direct fashion. However, this division is not quite as clear cut as it might
appear at first sight (see below). What we can say, nevertheless is that any variable
which shifts the Beveridge Curve to the right will increase equilibrium
unemployment. So a shift of the Beveridge Curve is a sufficient but not necessary
sign that equilibrium unemployment has changed.
We turn now to consider a series of variables which we might expect to
influence equilibrium unemployment either because of their impact on the
effectiveness with which the unemployed are matched to available jobs or because of
their direct effect on wages. The unemployment benefit system directly affects the
readiness of the unemployed to fill vacancies. Aspects of the system which are
clearly important are the level of benefits, their coverage, the length of time for which
they are available and the strictness with which the system is operated. Related to
unemployment benefits is the availability of other resources to those without jobs.
These include the returns on non-human wealth which may be increasing in the real
interest rate. (see Phelps, 1994, for an extensive discussion). Employment protection
laws may tend to make firms more cautious about filling vacancies which slows the
speed at which the unemployed move into work. This obviously reduces the
efficiency of job matching. However, the mechanism here is not clear-cut. For
example, the introduction of employment laws often leads to an increased
professionalisation of the personnel function within firms, as was the case in Britain
in the 1970s (see Daniel and Stilgoe, 1978). This can increase the efficiency of job
matching. So, in terms of outflows from unemployment, the impact of employment
8

protection laws can go either way. By contrast, it seems clear that such laws will tend
to reduce involuntary separations and hence lower inflows into unemployment. So
the overall impact on the Beveridge Curve and hence on unemployment is an
empirical question. Furthermore, employment law may also have a direct impact on
pay since it raises the job security of existing employees encouraging them to demand
higher pay increases.
Anything which makes it easier to match the unemployed to the available
vacancies will shift the Beveridge Curve to the left and reduce equilibrium
unemployment. Factors which operate in this way include the reduction of barriers to
mobility which may be geographical or occupational. Furthermore numerous
government policies are concerned to increase the ability and willingness of the
unemployed to take jobs. These are grouped under the heading of active labour
market policies.
Turning now to those factors which have a direct impact on wages, the
obvious place to start is the institutional structure of wage determination. Within
every country there is a variety of structures. In some sectors wages are determined
more of less competitively but in others wages are bargained between employers and
trade unions at the level of the establishment, firm or even industry. The overall
outcome depends on union power in wage bargains, union coverage and the degree of
co-ordination of wage bargains. Generally, greater union power and coverage can be
expected to exert upward pressure on wages, hence raising equilibrium
unemployment, but this can be offset if union wage setting across the economy is coordinated.
The final group of variables which directly impacts on wages falls under the
heading of real wage resistance. The idea here is that workers attempt to sustain
recent rates of real wage growth when the rate consistent with stable employment
shifts unexpectedly. For example, if there is an adverse shift in the terms of trade, real
consumption wages must fall if employment is not to decline. If workers persist in
attempting to bargain for rates of real wage growth which take no account of the
movement in the terms of trade, this will tend to raise unemployment. Exactly the
same argument applies if there is an unexpected fall in trend productivity growth or an
increase in labour taxes. For example, if labour taxes (payroll tax rates plus income
tax rates plus consumption tax rates) go up, the real post-tax consumption wage must
fall if real labour costs per employee facing firms are not to rise. Any resistance to
9

this fall will lead to a rise in unemployment. This argument suggests that increases in
real import prices, falls in trend productivity growth or rises in the labour tax rate may
lead to a temporary increase in unemployment.
However, it may be argued that changes in labour taxes may have a permanent
impact on unemployment depending on the extent to which the taxes are shifted onto
labour. A key issue here is the extent to which benefits or the value of leisure adjust
in proportion to post-tax earnings (see Pissarides 1998, for example).
To summarise, the variables which we might expect to influence equilibrium
unemployment include the unemployment benefit system, the real interest rate,
employment protection laws, barriers to labour mobility, active labour market
policies, union structures and the extent of co-ordination in wage bargaining, labour
taxes, and unexpected shifts in the terms of trade and trend productivity growth. So
the interesting question is, to what extent can we explain the secular shifts in
unemployment by changes in the, mainly institutional, variables noted above?
5. Labour Market Institutions and Unemployment Patterns
The purpose of this section is to consider whether it has proved possible to
explain the unemployment patterns shown in Table 5 by variations over time and
across countries in the sort of labour market institutions discussed in the previous
section. Cross-country variation in post-1980s unemployment is easy enough to
explain by cross-country variation in labour market institutions (see, for example,
Layard et al., 1991, p.55; Scarpetta, 1996; Nickell, 1997, Elmeskov et al., 1998;
Nickell and Layard 1999). More interesting and more tricky is to explain the time
series variation from the 1960s onward.
There are several different approaches that have been used. First there is a
basic division between studies that use econometric techniques to fit the data and
those which use calibrated models which typically distinguish between a stylised
“European” economy and a stylised “United States” economy. Second there is
another division between those which focus on changes in the institutions and those
which consider “shocks” or baseline factors which shift over time and are typically
interacted with average levels of institutional factors:
Looking first at panel data econometric models which interact stable
institutions with shocks or baseline variables, good examples include Layard et al.
(1991), Chapter 9 (p. 430-37), Blanchard and Wolfers (2000), Bertola et al. (2001)
and Fitoussi et al. (2000). All these focus on the time series variation in the data by
10

including country dummies. Layard et al. (1991) present a dynamic model of
unemployment based on annual data where the baseline variables include wage
pressure (a dummy which takes the value one from 1970), the benefit replacement
ratio, real import price changes and monetary shocks. Their impact on unemployment
differs across countries, since it depends on time invariant institutions, with different
sets of institutions affecting the degree of unemployment persistence, the impact of
wage pressure variables including the replacement rate and import prices, and the
effect of monetary shocks. The model explains the data better than individual country
autoregressions with trends.
Blanchard and Wolfers (2000) use five year averages to concentrate on longrun effects. The shocks or baseline variables consist of the level of TFP growth, the
real interest rate, the change in inflation and labour demand shifts (essentially the log
of labour’s share purged of the impact of factor prices). With the exception of the
change in inflation, these “shocks” are not mean reverting which is why we prefer the
term baseline variables. These variables are driving unemployment, so that, for
example, the fact that annual TFP growth is considerably higher in the 1960s than in
the 1990s in most countries is an important reason why unemployment is typically
higher in the latter period. Quite why this should be so is not wholly clear. Many
mechanisms are discussed in Saint-Paul (1991) but there is no evidence that they are
important or robust in Bean and Pissarides (1993) for example. Nevertheless,
interacting these observed baseline variables with time invariant institutional variables
fits the data well. In an alternative investigation, Blanchard and Wolfers replace the
observed shock variables with unobserved common shocks represented by time
dummies. When these are interacted with time invariant institutions, the explanatory
power of the model increases substantially.
The basic Blanchard and Wolfers model is extended in Bertola et al. (2001)
who include an additional baseline variable, namely the share of young people (age
15-24) in the population over 15 years old. The model explains a substantial
proportion of the divergence between US and other countries unemployment rates (48
to 63 percent) over the period 1970 to 1995, although an even higher proportion is
explained when the observed baseline variables are replaced by time dummies.
Fitoussi et al. (2000) proceed in a slightly different way. First they interact the
baseline variables with country dummies and then investigate the cross-section
relationship between these and labour market institutions. The baseline variables
11

include non-wage support (income from private wealth plus social spending) relative
to labour productivity and the real price of oil as well as two in common with
Blanchard and Wolfers (2000), namely the real rate of interest and productivity
growth. In all these four papers, the explanation of long-run changes in
unemployment has the same structure. The changes depend on long-run shifts in a set
of baseline variables, with the impact of these being much bigger and longer-lasting in
some countries than others because of stable institutional differences. The
persuasiveness of these explanations depends on whether the stories associated with
the baseline variables are convincing. For example, the notion that a fall in trend
productivity growth, a rise in the real price of oil or a downward shift in the labour
demand curve leads to a permanent rise in equilibrium unemployment in one which
many might find unappealing.
An interesting alternative, still in the context of the institutions/shocks
framework is the calibration analysis discussed in Ljungqvist and Sargent (1998).
The idea here is that in “Europe”, benefits are high with a long duration of eligibility
whereas in the “United States”, benefits are modest and of fixed duration. In a world
where turbulence is low, the probability of large skill losses among the unemployed is
low and the difference in the unemployment rates in “Europe” and the “United States”
is minimal, because the chances of an unemployed person in “Europe” finding a job
with wages exceeding the benefit level are high. In a world where turbulence is high,
the probability of large skill losses among the unemployed is high. As a consequence
the high level of benefits relative to past earnings and hence the high reservation wage
in “Europe” now bites and unemployment is much higher than in the “United States”.
So we have a situation where the relevant institution, namely the benefit system,
remains stable but the consequences are very different in a world of high turbulence
from those in a world of low turbulence.
While this model captures a particular feature of the situation, in order for it to
be a persuasive explanation of recent history it must pass two tests. First, we need
evidence that turbulence has indeed increased and second it must explain why many
countries in Europe now have relatively low unemployment. Indeed the variation in
unemployment (and employment) rates across European countries is far larger than
the difference between Europe and the United States. To justify the assumption of
increasing turbulence, Ljungqvist and Sargent point to the increasing variance of
transitory earnings in the United States reported by Gottschalk and Moffitt (1994).
12

There has also been a rise in the transitory variance in the UK, noted by Dickens
(2000). However these facts hardly add up to a full empirical test of the theory. For
example, in Europe, TFP growth has been much lower since 1976 than it was in the
earlier period and we might expect TFP growth to be positively associated with
turbulence. Indeed, the fall in TFP growth is one of the main factors generating a rise
in unemployment in Blanchard and Wolfers (2000). Furthermore, there is no
evidence of any significant changes in the rates of job creation and job destruction
over the relevant period (see Davis and Haltiwanger, 1999). Finally, no evidence is
presented which explains why the various European countries have such widely
differing unemployment patterns. So while the Lungqvist/Sargent model may capture
an element of the story, it hardly comes close to a full explanation.
Turning now to studies which simply rely on changing institutions to explain
unemployment patterns, notable examples include Belot and Van Ours (2000, 2001)
and Nickell et al. (2002). The former papers provide a good explanation of changes in
unemployment in eighteen OECD countries, although in order to do so they make
extensive use of interactions between institutions, something which has a sound
theoretical foundation (see Coe and Snower, 1997, for example). Their model is,
however, static like that of Blanchard and Wolfers. The model developed by Nickell
et al. (2002) uses annual data and since they explain actual unemployment, they
include in their model those factors which might explain the short-run deviations of
unemployment from its equilibrium level. Following the discussion in Hoon and
Phelps (1992) or Phelps (1994) these factors include aggregate demand shocks,
productivity shocks and wage shocks. More specifically, they include the following:
i)
ii)
iii)
iv)
v)

money supply shocks, specifically changes in the rate of growth of the
nominal money stock (i.e. the second difference of the log money supply);
productivity shocks, measured by changes in TFP growth or deviations of TFP
growth from trend;
labour demand shocks, measured by the residuals from a simple labour
demand model;
real import price shocks, measured by proportional changes in real import
prices weighted by the trade share;
the (ex-post) real interest rate.
With the exception of the real interest rate, these variables are genuine

“shocks” in the sense that they are typically stationary and tend to revert to their mean
quite rapidly. This distinguishes them from the “baseline variables” used in
Blanchard and Wolfers (2000), for example. On top of these variables, Nickell et al.

13

(2002) then use such time series of the institutional variables as are available
including employment protection, the benefit replacement rate, benefit duration, union
density, co-ordination and employment taxes. These variables are there to explain
equilibrium unemployment. Using a dynamic panel data model, the time series
patterns of unemployment are well explained. Based on dynamic simulations keeping
institutions fixed at their 1960s values, it is found that the institutional variables which
are included explain about 55 per cent of the individual country changes in
unemployment from the 1960s to the early 1990s. This is reasonable, particularly as
the early 1990s was a period of deep recession in much of Europe.
Overall, therefore, there is some evidence that the sort of labour market
institutions discussed in the previous section made a significant contribution to
explaining the patterns of unemployment reported in Table 5. So, as a final step, let
us see how these institutional variables have changed over time and what these
changes can tell us about why the European Big Four countries have performed less
well than most other countries on the unemployment front in the 1990s.
6. Changes in Labour Market Institutions and their Impact
In this section we look at changes in benefit systems, wage determination,
employment protection and labour taxes in the last decades of the 20th Century and
see what they can tell us.
The Unemployment Benefit System
There are four aspects of the unemployment benefit system for which there are
good theoretical and empirical reasons to believe that they will influence equilibrium
unemployment. These are, in turn, the level of benefits9 , the duration of
entitlement10, the coverage of the system11 and the strictness with which the system is
operated12. Of these, only the first two are available as time series for the OECD
countries. The OECD has collected systematic data on the unemployment benefit
replacement ratio for three different family types (single, with dependent spouse, with
spouse at work) in three different duration categories (1st year, 2nd and 3rd years, 4th
and 5th years) from 1961 to 1999 (every other year). (See OECD, 1994, Table 8.1 for
the 1991 data). From this we derive a measure of the benefit replacement ratio, equal
to the average over family types in the 1st year duration category and a measure of
benefit duration equal to [0.6 (2nd and 3rd year replacement ratio) + 0.4 (4th and 5th
year replacement ratio)] ÷ (1st year replacement ratio). So our measure of benefit

14

duration is the level of benefit in the later years of the spell normalised on the benefit
in the first year of the spell. A summary of these data is presented in Tables 8 and 9.
The key feature of these data is that in nearly all countries, benefit replacement
ratios have tended to become more generous from the 1960s to the late 1970s, the
exceptions being Germany, Japan and New Zealand. Italy had no effective benefit
system over this period for the vast majority of the unemployed. After the late 1970s,
countries moved in different directions. Italy introduced a benefit system and those in
Finland, Portugal and Switzerland became markedly more generous. By contrast,
benefit replacement ratios in Belgium, Ireland the UK have fallen steadily since the
late 1970s or early 1980s.
Table 8 here

It is unfortunate that we have no comprehensive time series data on the
coverage of the system or on the strictness with which it is administered. This is
particularly true in the case of the latter because the evidence we possess appears to
indicate that this is of crucial importance in determining the extent to which a
generous level of benefit will actually influence unemployment.

For example,

Denmark, which has very generous unemployment benefits (see Tables 8, 9), totally
reformed the operation of its benefit system through the 1990s with a view to
tightening the criteria for benefit receipt and the enforcement of these criteria via a
Table 9 here

comprehensive system of sanctions. The Danish Ministry of Labour is convinced that
this process has played a major role in allowing Danish unemployment to fall
dramatically since the early 1990s without generating inflationary pressure (see
Danish Ministry of Finance, 1999, Chapter 2). Just to see some of the ways in which
systems of administration vary across country, in Table 10 we present indices of the
strictness of the work availability conditions in various countries. These are based on
eight sub-indicators referring to the rules relating to the types of jobs that unemployed
individuals must accept or incur some financial or other penalty. We can see that
countries with notable lax systems in the mid-1990s include Austria, Finland, France,
Germany, Ireland and the UK, although Ireland and the UK have significantly
tightened their benefit operations since that time.

Table 10 here

A further aspect of the structure of the benefit system for which we do not
have detailed data back to the 1960s are those policies grouped under the heading of
active labour market policies (ALMP). We do, however, have data from 1985 which
we present in Table 11. The purpose of these is to provide active assistance to the
unemployed which will improve their chances of obtaining work. Multi-country
15

studies basically using cross section information indicate that ALMPs do have a
negative impact on unemployment (e.g. Scarpetta, 1996; Nickell, 1997; Elmeskov et
al., 1998). This broad brush evidence is backed up by numbers of microeconometric
studies (see Katz, 1998, Martin, 2000 or Martin and Grubb, 2001 for useful surveys)
which show that under some circumstances, active labour market policies are
effective. In particular, job search assistance tends to have consistently positive
outcomes but other types of measure such as employment subsidies and labour market
training must be well designed if they are to have a significant impact (see Martin,
2000, for a detailed analysis).
Turning to the numbers, we see that, by and large, the countries of Northern
Europe and Scandinavia devote most resources to ALMPs. It might be hypothesised
that they do this because high expenditure on ALMPs is required to offset their rather
generous unemployment benefit systems and to push unemployed individuals into
work. Such additional pressure on the unemployed is not required if benefits are very
low relative to potential earnings in work.
Systems of Wage Determination
In most countries in the OECD, the majority of workers have their wages set
by collective bargaining between employers and trade unions at the plant, firm,
industry or aggregate level. This is important for our purposes because there is some
evidence that trade union power in wage setting has a significant impact on
unemployment13.

Unfortunately, we do not have complete data on collective

bargaining coverage (the proportion of employees covered by collective agreements)
but the data presented in Table 12 give a reasonable picture.

Across most of

Continental Europe, including Scandinavia but excluding Switzerland, coverage is
both high and stable. As we shall see, this is either because most people belong to
Table 12 here

trade unions or because union agreements are extended by law to cover non-members
in the same sector. In Switzerland and in the OECD countries outside Continental
Europe and Scandinavia, coverage is generally much lower with the exception of
Australia. In the UK, the US and New Zealand, coverage has declined with the fall in
union density, there being no extension laws.

Table 13 here

In Table 13, we present the percentage of employees who are union members.
Across most of Scandinavia, membership tends to be high. By contrast, in much of
Continental Europe and in Australia, union density tends to be less than 50 percent
and is gradually declining. In these countries there is, consequently, a wide and
16

widening gap between density and coverage which it is the job of the extension laws
to fill. This situation is at its most stark in France, which has the lowest union density
in the OECD at around 10 percent, but one of the highest levels of coverage (around
95 percent). Outside these regions, both density and coverage tend to be relatively
low and both are declining at greater or lesser rates. The absence of complete
coverage data means that we have to rely on the density variable to capture the impact
of unionisation on unemployment. As should be clear, this is only half the story, so
we must treat any results we find in this area with some caution.
The other aspect of wage bargaining which appears to have a significant
impact on wages and unemployment is the extent to which bargaining is coordinated14, 15. Roughly speaking, the evidence suggests that if bargaining is highly
co-ordinated, this will completely offset the adverse effects of unionism on
employment (see Nickell and Layard, 1999, for example). Co-ordination refers to
mechanisms whereby the aggregate employment implications of wage determination
are taken into account when wage bargains are struck. This may be achieved if wage
bargaining is highly centralised, as in Austria, or if there are institutions, such as
employers’ federations, which can assist bargainers to act in concert even when
bargaining itself ostensibly occurs at the level of the firm or industry, as in Germany
or Japan (see Soskice, 1991). It is worth noting that co-ordination is not, therefore,
the same as centralisation which refers simply to the level at which bargaining takes
place (plant, firm, industry or economy-wide). In Table 14, we present co-ordination
indices for the OECD from the 1960s. The first index (co-ord 1) basically ignores
transient changes whereas the second (co-ord 2) tries to capture the various detailed
Table 14 here

nuances of the variations in the institutional structure. Notable changes are the
increases in co-ordination in Ireland and the Netherlands towards the end of the period
and the declines in co-ordination in Australia, New Zealand and Sweden.

Co-

ordination also declines in the UK over the same period but this simply reflects the
sharp decline of unionism overall.
Employment Protection
Employment protection laws are thought by many to be a key factor in
generating labour market inflexibility.

Despite this, evidence that they have a

decisive impact on overall rates of unemployment is mixed, at best16. In Table 15, we
present details of an employment protection index for the OECD countries. Features

17

to note are the wide variation in the index across countries and the fact that, in some
countries, the basic legislation was not introduced until the 1970s.
Table 15 here

Labour Taxes
The important taxes here are those that form part of the wedge between the
real product wage (labour costs per employee normalised on the output price) and the
real consumption wage (after tax pay normalised on the consumer price index). These
are payroll taxes, income taxes and consumption taxes. Their combined impact on
unemployment remains a subject of some debate despite the large number of
empirical investigations. Indeed some studies indicate that employment taxes have no
long run impact on unemployment whatever whereas others present results which
imply that they can explain more or less all the rise in unemployment in most
countries during the 1960-1985 period17. In Table 16 we present the total tax rate on
labour for the OECD countries. All countries exhibit a substantial increase over the
period from the 1960s to the 1990s although there are wide variations across
countries. These mainly reflect the extent to which health, higher education and
pensions are publicly provided along with the all-round generosity of the social
security system. Some countries have made significant attempts to reduce labour

Table 16 here

taxes in recent years, notably the Netherlands and the UK.
Labour Market Institutions and the Successes and Failures of the 1990s
Having looked at some of the key factors which the evidence suggests have
some impact on equilibrium unemployment, let us see how changes in these variables
over the last two decades can contribute to our understanding of unemployment
changes over the same period. In Table 17, we provide a picture of changes in the
relevant variables with a tick referring to a significant move which will tend to reduce
unemployment and a cross for the reverse. Double ticks and crosses reflect really big
moves. A dash implies no significant change. Of course, this is a pretty crude
business and a proper panel data analysis is arguable preferable. However, here we
are able to take account of variables where we are unable to obtain long time series.

Table 17 here

Readers who prefer panel data analysis can consult the papers discussed in Section 5.
So we can ask the question, do the ticks and crosses bear any relationship to
the unemployment changes reported in the final columns of the table? If we regress
the unemployment change on the number of ticks and crosses we obtain:

18

Unemployment change (%) = 0.25 –1.25 ticks +1.21 crosses
(80/87 to 00/01)

(3.1)

 R 2 = 0.51


 N = 20 



(2.2)

Or, in restricted form,
Unemployment change (%) = -0.42 -1.24 (ticks-crosses)
(80/87 to 00/01)

 R 2 = 0.51


 N = 20 



(4.3)

The restriction is easily accepted. So the number of ticks and crosses explains about
half the cross-country variation in unemployment changes from the early 80s to the
present day. We may reasonably conclude that the countries which had very high
unemployment in the early 1980s and still have high unemployment today simply
have too few ticks and/or too many crosses.
7. Summary and Conclusions
Average unemployment in Europe today is relatively high compared with
OECD countries outside Europe. The majority of countries in Europe today have
lower unemployment than any OECD country outside Europe, including the US.
These two facts are consistent because the four largest countries in Continental
Western Europe namely, France, Germany, Italy, Spain, (the Big Four), have very
high unemployment and most of the rest have comparatively low unemployment.
This variability is highly informative because the fifteen European countries which we
consider have more or less independent labour markets in practice, despite “free”
movement of labour. Using this information we see how changes in the structure of
the various labour markets explain a substantial proportion of the secular fluctuations
in unemployment in the various countries. In particular, we pin down some of the
particular factors which enable us to understand why some European countries have
been able fully to recover from the unemployment disasters of the early 1980s
whereas some have not.

19

Endnotes
1. Australia, Canada, Japan, New Zealand, US.
2. Of course, we are currently gradually recovering from a relatively mild recession,
but most countries in the OECD are at similar stages in the cycle, so this is not
causing significant distortions.
3. A key isue here is whether husbands and wives are taxed jointly or separately.
See OECD (1990), Table 6.3.
4. From a report in The Guardian newspaper, April 6, 2002.
5. There is obviously some short-run slippage between aggregate demand and
employment accounted for by variation in inventories and the intensity of work by
employees. This is not germane to the main thrust of the argument in the text.
6. 2% is at the top of the ECB target range.
7. Of course, the US economy turned down in 2001 and this would have had some
additional impact on the Eurozone. However, looking closely at the data, we see
that in 2000/2, GDP growth has exceeded the growth of final domestic demand in
every quarter, indicating a positive contribution of net trade (plus inventories)
throughout. Furthermore, from the peak of GDP growth [2000 (ii)] to the trough
[2002 (i)], GDP growth fell by 3.8 percentage points and the final domestic
demand contribution fell by 3.5 percentage points. So the vast majority of the fall
arises domestically.
8. This is a standard consequence of hysteresis in the unemployment process. There
is a discussion on p.382 of Layard et al. (1991).
9. A good general reference is Holmlund (1998). A useful survey of micro studies
can be found in OECD (1994), Chapter 8. Micro evidence from policy changes is
contained in Carling et al. (1999), Hunt (1995) and Harkman (1997). Crosscountry macro evidence is available in Nickell and Layard (1999), Scarpetta
(1996) and Elmeskov et al. (1998). The average of their results indicates a 1.11
percentage point rise in equilibrium unemployment for every 10 percentage point
rise in the benefit replacement ratio.
10. There is fairly clear micro evidence that shorter benefit entitlement leads to
shorter unemployment duration (see Ham and Rea (1987), Katz and Meyer (1990)
and Carling et al. (1996)).
11. Variations in the coverage of unemployment benefits are large (see OECD, 1994,
Table 8.4) and there is a strong positive correlation between coverage and the
level of benefit (OECD, 1994, p.190). Bover et al. (1998) present strong evidence
for Spain and Portugal that the covered exit unemployment more slowly than the
uncovered.

20

12. There is strong evidence that the strictness with which the benefit system is
operated, at given levels of benefit, is a very important determinant of
unemployment duration. Micro evidence for the Netherlands may be found in
Abbring et al. (1999) and Van Den Berg et al. (1999). Cross country evidence is
available in the Danish Ministry of Finance (1999), Chapter 2 and in OECD
(2000), Chapter 4.
13. See the discussion in Nickell and Layard (1999), Section 8 and Booth et al. (2000)
(particularly around Table 6.2) for positive evidence.
14. See the discussion in Nickell and Layard (1999), Section 8, Booth et al. (2000)
(particularly around Table 6.1) and OECD (1997), Chapter 3.
15. One aspect of wage determination which we do not analyse in this paper is
minimum wages. This is for two reasons. First, the balance of the evidence
suggests that minimum wages are generally low enough not to have much of an
impact on employment except for young people. Second, only around half the
OECD countries had statutory minimum wages over the period 1960-95. Of
course, trade unions may enforce “minimum wages” but this is only a minor part
of their activities. And these are already accounted for in our analysis of density,
coverage and co-ordination.
16. The results presented by Lazear (1990), Addison and Grosso (1996), Bentolila and
Bertola (1990), Elmeskov et al. (1998), Nickell and Layard (1999) do not add up
to anything very decisive although there is a clear positive relationship between
employment protection and long-term unemployment.
17. A good example of a study in this latter group is Daveri and Tabellini (2000)
whereas one in the former group is OECD (1990, Annex 6). Extensive
discussions may be found in Nickell and Layard (1999), Section 6, Disney (2000)
and Pissarides (1998).

21

References

Abbring, J. H., Van Den Berg, G. J and Van Ours, J. C. (1999) “The Effect of
Unemployment

Insurance

Sanctions

on

the

Transition

Rate

from

Unemployment to Employment”, Tinbergen Institute, University of Amsterdam.
Addison, J. T. and Grosso, J-L. (1996) “Job Security Provisions and Unemployment:
Revised Estimates”, Industrial Relations 35, 585-603.
Bamber, G. J. and R. D. Lansbury (eds.) (1998), International and Comparative
Employment Relations. A Study of Industrialised Market Economies (London.
Thousand Oaks, New Delhi)
Bean, C. and Pissarides, C.A. (1993), “Unemployment, Consumption and Growth”,
European Economic Review, 37(4), pp. 837-54.
Belot, M. and van Ours, J. C. (2000), “Does the Recent Success of Some OECD
Countries in Lowering their Unemployment Rates Lie in the Clever Design of
their Labour Market Reforms?”, IZA Discussion Paper No. 147, April (Bonn,
Germany)
Belot, M. and van Ours, J.C. (2001), “Unemployment and Labor Market Institutions:
An Empirical Analysis”, Journal of Japanese and International Economics, 15,
pp 1-16.
Bentolila, S. and Bertola, G. (1990) “Firing Costs and Labour Demand: How Bad is
Euro sclerosis?” Review of Economic Studies, 57, 381-402.
Bertola, G., Blau F.D and Kahn, L.M. (2001), “Comparative Analysis of LaborMarket Outcomes: Lessons for the United States from International Long –run
Evidence” in A. Krueger and R.Solow (eds.) The Roaring Nineties: Can Full
Employment be Sustained? (New York: Russell Sage Foundation)
Blanchard, O. and Katz, L. (1999), “What We Know and Do Not Know about the
Natural Rate of Unemployment”, Journal of Economic Perspectives.
Blanchard, O. and Wolfers, J. (2000) “The Role of Shocks and Institutions in the Rise
of European Unemployment: The Aggregate Evidence”, The Economic Journal
(Conference Papers), 110, C1-C33.
Blondal, S. and Scarpetta, S. (1998), “The Retirement Decision in OECD Countries”,
OECD Economics Dept., Working Paper No. 202.

22

Booth, A., Burda, M., Calmfors, L., Checchi, D., Naylor, R., Visser, J. (2000) “What
do Unions do in Europe?”, A Report for the Fondazione Rodolfo DeBenedetti,
Milan.
Bound, J. and Berkhauser, R. V. (1999), “Economic Analysis of Transfer Programs
Targeted on People with Disabilities” in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds.),
Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol 3C (Amsterdam: North Holland)
Bover, O., Garcia-Perea, P., Portugal, P, (1998) “A Comparative Study of the
Portuguese and Spanish Labour Markets”, Banco de Espana, mimeo.
Carling, K., Edin, P-A., Harkman, A. and Holmlund, B. (1996) “Unemployment
Duration, Unemployment Benefits and Labor Market Programs in Sweden”,
Journal of Public Economics 59, 313-334
Carling, K., Holmlund, B. and Vejsiu, A. (1999) “Do Benefit Cuts Boost Job
Findings? Swedish Evidence from the 1990s”, Swedish Office of Labour
Market Policy Evaluation, Working Paper 1999:8 (Uppsala, Sweden).
Coe, D. T. and Snower, D. J. (1997), “Policy Complementarities: The Case for
Fundamental Labour Market Reform”, CEPR Discussion Paper No. 1585
(London: CEPR)
Daniel, W. W. and Stilgoe, E. (1978), The Impact of Employment Protection Laws
(London: Policy Studies Institute).
Danish Ministry of Finance (1999), The Danish Economy: Medium Term Economic
Survey (Copenhagen: Ministry of Finance)
Daveri, F. and Tabellini, G. (2000) “Unemployment, Growth and Taxation in
Industrial Countries”, Economic Policy (April), 49-90
Davis, S. and Haltiwanger, J. (1999), “Gross Job Flows” in O. Ashenfelter and D.
Card (eds.) The Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol 3B (Amsterdam: Elsevier)
Dickens, R. (2000), “The Earnings Instability of Men in the UK”, Economic Journal
Disney, R. (2000) “Fiscal Policy and Employment 1: A Survey of Macroeconomic
Models, Methods and Findings”, IMF, mimeo.
Ebbinghaus, B. and Visser, J. (2000), Trade Unions in Western Europe (London:
MacMillan).
Elmeskov, J., Martin, J. P. and Scarpetta, S. (1998) “Key Lessons for Labour Market
Reforms: Evidence from OECD Countries’ Experiences”, Swedish Economic
Policy Review, 5(2), 205-252.

23

Ferner, A. and Hyman, R. (eds) (1998), Changing Industrial Relations in Europe, 2nd
edition (Oxford: Malden).
Fitoussi, J-P., Jestaz, D., Phelps, E.S., Zoega, G. (2000), “Roots of the Recent
Recoveries: Labor Reforms or Private Sector Forces?”, Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 1, 237-291.
Gottshalk, P. and Moffitt (1994), “The Growth of Earnings Instability in the US Labor
Market”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, pp. 217-72
Ham, J. and Rea, S. (1987) “Unemployment Insurance and Male Unemployment
Duration in Canada”, Journal of Labor Economics, 5, 325-53.
Harkman, A. (1997) “Unemployment Compensation and Unemployment Duration –
What was the Effect of the Cut in the Replacement Rate from 90 to 80 percent?”
in Harkman, A., Jansson, F., Kallberg, K. and Öhrn, L. (eds) Unemployment
Insurance and the Functioning of the Labour Market (The Swedish National
Labour Market Board, Stockholm).
Holmlund, B. (1998) “Unemployment Insurance in Theory and Practice”, The
Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 100(1), 113-141.
Hoon, H.T. and Phelps, E.S. (1992), “Macroeconomic Shocks in a Dynamized Model
of the Natural Rate of Unemployment”, American Economic Review, 82.
Hunt, J. (1995) “The Effect of Unemployment Compensation on Unemployment
Duration in Germany”, Journal of Labor Economics, 13, 88-120.
Katz, L. F. (1998), “Wage Subsidies for the Disadvantaged” in R. Freeman and P.
Gottschalk (eds.) Generating Jobs (New York: Russell Sage Foundation).
Katz, L. and Meyer, B. (1990) “The Impact of Potential Duration of Unemployment
Benefits on the Duration of Unemployment”, Journal of Public Economics, 41,
45-72.
Layard, R., Nickell, S. and Jackman, R. (1991), Unemployment: Macroeconomic
Performance and the Labour Market (Oxford: Oxford University Press)
Lazear, E. P. (1990) “Job Security Provisions and Employment”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 105, 699-726.
Ljungqvist, L. and Sargent, T.J. (1998), “The European Unemployment Dilemma”,
Journal of Political Economy, 106(3), pp 514-50.
Martin, J. (2000), “What Works among Active Labour Market Policies? Evidence
from OECD Countries”, OECD Economic Studies No.30, 79-112 (Paris: OECD)

24

Martin, J.P and Grubb, D. (2001), “What Works and For Whom: A Review of OECD
Countries’ Experiences with Active Labour Market Policies”, OECD, Paris,
mimeo.
Mortensen, D. T. and Pissarides, C. A. (1999), “New Developments in Models of
Search in the Labor Market” in Ashenfelter, O. and Card, D. (eds.) Handbook of
Labor Market (Amsterdam: North Holland)
Nicoletti, G., Scarpetta, S. and Boylaud, O. (2000), “Summary Indicators of Product
Market Regulation with an Extension to Employment Protection Legislation”,
Economics Dept. Working Paper No. 226, OECD, Paris
Nickell, S. J. and Layard, R. (1999) “Labour Market Institutions and Economic
Performance” in O.Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds.) Handbook of Labor
Economics Vol. 3 (Amsterdam: North Holland)
Nickell, S. J. (1997), “Unemployment and Labour Market Rigidities: Europe versus
North America”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 11(3), 55-74.
Nickell, S. J., Nunziata, L., Ochel, W. and Quintini, G. (2002), “The Beveridge
Curve, Unemployment and Wages in the OECD from the 1960s to the 1990s”,
in P. Aghion, R. Frydman, J. Stiglitz and M. Woodford (eds.) Knowledge,
Information, and Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: Essays in Honor
of E. S. Phelps (Princeton: Princeton University Press)
Ochel, W. (2000), “Collective Bargaining Coverage”, Ifo Institute for Economic
Research, Munich.
Ochel, W. (2000a), “Collective Bargaining (Centralization and Co-ordination)”, Ifo
Institute, Munich.
OECD (1990), Employment Outlook (Paris: OECD)
OECD (1997), Employment Outlook (Paris: OECD)
OECD (1994) The OECD Jobs Study, Evidence and Explanations, Vols. I and II
(OECD, Paris)
Phelps, E. S. (1994), Structural Slumps, The Modern Equilibrium Theory of
Unemployment, Interest and Assets (Cambridge MA: Harvard University
Press).
Pissarides, C. (1998) “The Impact of Employment Tax Cuts on Unemployment and
Wages; the Role of Unemployment Benefits and Tax Structure”, European
Economic Review, 47, 155-83
Pissarides, C. A., (1990), Equilibrium Unemployment Theory (Oxford: Basil
25

Blackwell)
Saint-Paul, G. (1991), “Productivity Growth and Unemployment in OECD
Countries”, Working Paper No. 91-09, DELTA: Paris.
Scarpetta, S. (1996), “Assessing the Role of Labour Market Policies and Institutional
Settings on Unemployment: A Cross Country Study”, OECD Economic Studies
26:43-98
Soskice, D. (1991), “Wage Determination: The Changing Role of Institutions in
Advanced Industrialised Countries”, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 6, 3661.
Traxler, F.: (1996) Collective Bargaining and Industrial Change: A Case of
Disorganization? A Comparative Analysis of Eighteen OECD Countries,
European Sociological Review, Vol.12, No.3, pp. 271-287.
Traxler, F. and Kittel, B. (1999), “The Bargaining System and Performance: A
Comparison of 18 OECD Countries”, Comparative Political Studies
(forthcoming).
Van Den Berg, G., Van Der Klaauw, B. and Van Ours, J. C. (1999), “Punitive
Sanctions and the Transition Rate from Welfare to Work”, Tinbergen Institute,
University of Amsterdam.
Visser, J. (1996), “Unionisation Trends. The OECD Countries Union Membership
File”, University of Amsterdam, Centre for Research of European Societies and
Labour Relations.
Wallerstein, M. (1999), “Wage-Setting Institutions and Pay Inequality in Advanced
Industrial Societies”, American Journal of Political Science 43(3), July.
Windmüller, J.P. (1987), Collective Bargaining in Market Economics. A Reappraisal
(Geneva: ILO)
Zellner, A. (1962), “ A Efficient Method of Estimating Seemingly Unrelated
Regression and Tests for Aggregation Bias”, Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 57.

26

Table 1
A Picture of Employment and Unemployment in the OECD in 2001
Unemployment (%)

Inactivity
Rate (%)

Employment
Rate (%)

Hours per
year

2001

2002
(latest
data)**

Europe
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Ireland
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
UK
EU

3.6
6.6
4.3
9.1
8.6
7.9
3.8
9.5
2.4
3.6
4.1
10.7
5.1
2.6
5.0
7.6

4.1
6.9
4.2
8.9
9.2
8.3
4.4
9.2
2.8
3.9
4.4
11.2
5.0
2.6
5.2
-

29.3
36.4
21.8
25.4
32.0
28.4
32.5
39.3
24.3
19.7
28.2
34.2
20.7
18.8
25.1
30.8

67.8
59.7
75.9
67.7
62.0
65.9
65.0
54.9
74.1
77.5
68.7
58.8
75.3
79.1
71.3
64.1

1528
1482
1694
1532
1467
1674
1606
1346
1364
1816
1603
1568*
1711
-

Non-Europe
Australia
Canada
Japan
New Zealand
US

6.7
7.2
5.0
5.3
4.8

6.5
7.5
5.4
5.3
5.6

26.2
23.5
27.4
24.1
23.2

68.9
70.9
68.8
71.8
73.1

1837
1801*
1821*
1817
1821

*refers to 2000. **refers to the period between Feb and Aug 2002.
OECD Employment Outlook 2002, Tables A, B, F.
Unemployment is based on OECD standardised rates. These approximate the ILO definition. Hours
per year is an average over all workers, part-time and full time.

27

Table 2
Long-Term Unemployment in 2001 (over 12 months)
Long-Term Unemployment
Rate

Short-Term Unemployment
Rate

Europe
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Ireland
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
UK
EU

0.8
3.4
1.0
2.4
3.2
4.1
2.1
5.7
0.4
0.2
1.6
5.7
1.1
0.8
1.4
3.3

2.8
3.2
3.3
6.7
5.4
3.8
1.7
3.8
2.0
3.4
2.5
7.3
4.0
1.8
3.6
4.3

Non-Europe
Australia
Canada
Japan
New Zealand
US

1.4
0.7
1.3
1.0
0.3

5.3
6.5
3.7
4.3
4.5

Based on OECD Employment Outlook 2002, Table G.

28

Table 3
Unemployment, Inactivity and Employment by Age and Gender in 2001
Unemployment (%)
Men
Europe
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Ireland
Italya
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
UK
EU

Inactivity Rate (%)

25-54

55-64

Women
25-54
55-64

3.4
4.8
2.9
6.9
6.3
7.3
3.4
6.4
1.4
2.7
2.6
6.3
4.4
1.0
4.1
5.5

5.7
3.9
4.0
8.9
5.6
10.3
2.6
4.6
1.7
1.7
3.2
5.6
5.3
1.8
4.4
6.3

3.8
6.1
4.1
8.0
10.1
7.7
3.0
12.5
2.1
2.5
4.4
13.7
3.7
3.4
3.6
7.9

5.2
0.9
4.0
8.8
6.6
12.5
2.7
4.9
1.1
1.4
3.1
8.0
4.5
1.6
1.8
6.6

Men

Employment Rate (%)

25-54

55-64

Women
25-54
55-64

25-54

55-64

Women
25-54
55-64

6.5
9.1
8.6
9.0
5.9
5.7
8.2
9.6
6.0
8.6
7.2
8.4
9.4
3.7
8.7
8.2

59.8
63.4
34.3
48.8
56.2
49.4
33.6
57.8
48.6
26.4
36.4
38.6
26.5
17.5
35.6
47.8

23.1
29.3
16.5
15.0
21.3
21.7
33.9
42.1
25.8
16.7
21.9
38.8
14.4
20.7
23.6
28.4

90.3
86.5
88.7
84.7
88.1
87.5
88.7
84.6
92.7
88.9
90.4
85.9
86.6
95.3
87.6
86.8

37.9
35.1
63.1
46.7
41.4
45.4
64.6
40.3
50.5
72.3
61.6
57.9
69.6
81.0
61.6
48.9

74.0
66.4
80.1
78.2
70.8
72.2
64.1
50.7
72.6
81.2
74.7
52.8
82.5
76.6
73.6
66.0

81.7
84.2
48.1
50.5
65.9
67.6
70.8
84.1
71.7
36.8
58.1
76.4
32.7
43.8
56.0
68.1

Men

17.4
15.6
49.8
45.1
31.8
28.4
28.4
15.2
28.0
62.3
40.6
21.8
64.3
55.3
43.2
29.8

Non-Europe
Australia
5.5
5.6
5.0
3.3
10.1
40.0
28.6
63.1
85.0
43.3
67.8
35.7
Canada
6.3
6.0
6.0
5.6
8.9
38.8
20.9
58.2
85.4
57.6
74.3
39.4
Japan
4.2
7.0
4.7
3.7
3.1
16.6
32.7
50.8
92.8
77.5
64.1
47.3
New Zealand
4.0
4.0
4.1
2.8
8.7
25.7
25.5
48.2
87.6
71.3
71.5
50.3
US
3.7
3.4
3.8
2.7
8.7
31.9
23.6
47.0
87.9
65.8
73.5
51.6
a) 2000
OECD Employment Outlook 2002, Table C.
Note: These data do not include those in prison. This makes little odds except in the US where counting those in prison would raise the inactivity rate among prime age
men by around 2 percentage points.

29

Table 4
Youth Unemployment Rate (%), 2001
Age 15-24
Total

Men

Women

Europe
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Ireland
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
UK
EU

6.0
15.3
8.3
19.9
18.7
8.4
6.2
27.0
4.4
10.5
9.2
20.8
11.8
5.6
10.5
13.9

6.2
14.3
7.3
19.6
16.2
9.1
6.4
23.2
4.2
10.6
7.2
16.1
12.7
5.8
12.0
13.1

5.8
16.6
9.3
20.2
21.8
7.5
5.8
32.2
4.5
10.3
11.9
27.0
10.8
5.5
8.7
15.0

Non-Europe
Australia
Canada
Japan
New Zealand
US

12.7
12.8
9.7
11.8
10.6

13.3
14.5
10.7
12.1
11.4

12.0
11.0
8.7
11.5
9.7

OECD Employment Outlook 2002, Table C.

Table 5
Unemployment (Standardised Rate) %

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Norway
New Zealand
Portugal
Spain
Spain*
Sweden
Switzerland
UK
USA

1960-64

1965-72

1973-79

1980-87

1988-95

1996-99

2000-1

2002

2.5
1.6
2.3
5.5
2.2
1.4
1.5
0.8
5.1
3.5
1.4
0.9
2.2
0.0
2.3
]2.4

1.9
1.4
2.3
4.7
1.7
2.4
2.3
0.8
5.3
4.2
1.3
1.7
1.7
0.3
2.5
2.7

4.6
1.4
5.8
6.9
4.1
4.1
4.3
2.9
7.3
4.5
1.8
4.7
1.8
0.7
5.5
4.9

7.7
3.1
11.2
9.7
7.0
5.1
8.9
6.1
13.8
6.7
2.5
10.0
2.4
4.7
7.8
17.6

8.7
3.6
8.4
9.5
8.1
]9.9
10.5
5.6
14.7
8.1
2.5
7.2
5.2
8.1
5.4
19.6

1.6
0.0
3.1
4.3

1.6
0.8
4.8
6.4

2.3
1.8
10.5
7.6

5.1
2.8
8.8
6.1

6.5
3.7
6.8
7.0
4.4
9.4
9.0
6.4
4.0
8.4
4.9
2.6
3.6
5.7
4.1
13.5
11.0
5.5
2.6
5.2
4.4

6.3
4.3
7.3
7.7
4.5
9.1
8.7
6.8
4.4
7.4
5.4
2.8
3.9
5.2
5.1

1.2
0.2
2.6
5.5

7.9
4.3
9.2
8.7
5.3
12.2
11.5
7.4
8.7
9.9
3.9
4.5
3.8
6.8
6.0
19.4
15.8
8.6
3.5
6.8
4.8

11.4
4.9
2.6
5.1
5.8

Notes. As far as possible, these numbers correspond to the OECD standardised rates and conform to the ILO
definition. The exception here is Italy where we use the US Bureau of Labor Statistics “unemployment rates on
US concepts”. In particular we use the correction to the OECD standardised rates made by the Bureau prior to
1993. This generates a rate which is 1.6 percentage points below the OECD standardised rate after 1993. The rates
referred to in Spain* refer to recently revised ILO rates. For earlier years we use the data reported in LNJ
published by the UK Department of Education and Employment.

Table 6
Macroeconomic Patterns in the Eurozone, 1994-2002

Short-term interest rate
(%)
Final domestic demand
contribution to growth
(annual %)
GDP growth (annual %)
Unemployment Rate (%)
Inflation (CPI)

Short-term interest rate
(%)
Final domestic demand
contribution to growth
(annual %)
GDP growth (annual %)
Unemployment Rate (%)
Inflation (CPI)

Notes:

94

95

96

97

98

99

00(i)

00(ii)

00(iii)

00(iv)

5.3

4.5

3.3

3.3

3.5

3.0

3.5

4.3

4.7

5.0

1.5

1.7

1.5

1.7

3.1

3.6

3.1

3.5

2.6

2.2

2.4
10.9
2.8

2.2
10.6
2.6

1.4
10.9
2.3

2.3
10.9
1.7

2.9
10.3
1.2

2.8
9.3
1.1

3.8
8.7
2.1

4.2
8.5
2.1

3.2
8.3
2.5

2.7
8.1
2.7

01(i)

01(ii)

01(iii)

01(iv)

02(i)

02(ii)

02(iii)

02(iv)

03(i)

03(ii)

03(iii)

4.8

4.6

4.3

3.4

3.4

3.4

3.4

3. 1

2.7

2.4

2.1

2.0

1.4

1.1

0.7

-0.2

-0.2

0.0

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.6

2.4
8.0
2.3

1.5
7.9
3.1

1.3
8.0
2.5

0.5
8.1
2.5

0.5
8.3
2.6

0.9
8.4
2.1

1.0
8.5
2.1

1.1
8.6
2.3

0.7
8.7
2.3

0.1
8.8
2.0

0.3
8.8
2.0

The quarterly annual growth rates are based on the current quarter relative to
the same quarter one year earlier. Final domestic demand is C+I+G in obvious
notation.
These data are from the Bank of England databank.

31

Table 7
Examples of Unemployment and Inflation Patterns
87

88

89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

98

99

00

01

Finland u

5.0
3.6

4.5
4.7

3.2
6.5

3.2
6.1

6.6
4.1

11.6
2.6

16.4
2.2

16.7
1.0

15.2
1.0

14.5
0.6

12.6
1.2

11.4
1.4

10.2
1.2

9.7
3.4

9.1
2.5

Japan u

2.8
0.1

2.5
0.7

2.3
2.3

2.1
3.1

2.1
3.2

2.2
1.8

2.5
1.2

2.9
0.7

3.1
-0.1

3.4
0.1

3.4
1.8

4.1
0.6

4.7
-0.3

4.7
-0.7

5.0
-0.7

p&

p&

u is the ILO unemployment rate.
p& is the CPI inflation rate.

32

Table 8
Unemployment Benefit Replacement Ratios, 1960-95

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany (W)
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Norway
New Zealand
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
UK
US

1960-64

1965-72

1973-79

1980-87

1988-95

1999

0.18
0.15
0.37
0.39
0.25
0.13
0.48
0.43
0.21
0.09
0.36
0.39
0.12
0.37
0.35
0.11
0.04
0.27
0.22

0.15
0.17
0.40
0.43
0.35
0.18
0.51
0.41
0.24
0.06
0.38
0.64
0.13
0.30
0.48
0.16
0.02
0.36
0.23

0.23
0.30
0.55
0.59
0.55
0.29
0.56
0.39
0.44
0.04
0.31
0.65
0.28
0.27
0.17
0.62
0.57
0.21
0.34
0.28

0.23
0.34
0.50
0.57
0.67
0.38
0.61
0.38
0.50
0.02
0.29
0.67
0.56
0.30
0.44
0.75
0.70
0.48
0.26
0.30

0.26
0.34
0.48
0.58
0.64
0.53
0.58
0.37
0.40
0.26
0.30
0.70
0.62
0.29
0.65
0.68
0.72
0.61
0.22
0.26

0.25
0.42
0.46
0.49
0.66
0.54
0.59
0.37
0.35
0.60*
0.37
0.70
0.62
0.30
0.65
0.63
0.74
0.74
0.17
0.29

Source: OECD. Based on the replacement ratio in the first year of an unemployment spell averaged over three
family types. See OECD (1994), Table 8.1 for an example.
* This number refers to the “mobility” benefit, paid to those who become unemployed as a result of a collective
layoff. Most Italian unemployed do not fall under this category.

33

Table 9
Unemployment Benefit Duration Index, 1960-95

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Norway
New
Zealand
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
UK
US

1960-64

1965-72

1973-79

1980-87

1988-95

1999

1.02
0
1.0
0.33
0.63
0
0.28
0.57
0.68
0
0
0.12
0
1.02

1.02
0
0.96
0.31
0.66
0.14
0.23
0.57
0.78
0
0
0.35
0.07
1.02

1.02
0.69
0.78
0.20
0.66
0.72
0.19
0.61
0.39
0
0
0.53
0.45
1.02

1.02
0.75
0.79
0.25
0.62
0.61
0.37
0.61
0.40
0
0
0.66
0.49
1.04

1.02
0.74
0.77
0.22
0.84
0.53
0.49
0.61
0.39
0.13
0
0.57
0.50
1.04

1.00
0.68
0.78
0.42
1.00
0.63
0.47
0.75
0.77
0
0
0.64
0.60
1.00

0
0
0
0.87
0.12

0
0
0
0.59
0.17

0
0.01
0.04
0
0.54
0.19

0.11
0.21
0.05
0
0.71
0.17

0.35
0.27
0.04
0.18
0.70
0.18

0.58
0.29
0.02
0.31
0.96
0.22

Source: OECD. Based on [0.06 (replacement ratio in 2nd and 3rd years of a spell) + 0.04 (replacement ratio in 4th
and 5th year of a spell)] ÷ (replacement ratio in 1st year of a spell).

34

Table 10
Index of the Strictness of Work Availability Conditions, Mid-1990s

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmarka
Finland
France
Germany
Ireland
Italy

3.6
2.3
3.1
2.8
3.0
2.7
2.7
2.6
1.7
-

Japan
Netherlands
Norway
New Zealand
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
UK
US

3.7
3.3
2.7
2.8
3.7
2.6
3.3

Source: Danish Ministry of Finance (1999), The Danish Economy Medium Term Economic Survey, Figure 2.4 d.
a) This refers to 1998. In the early 1990s, the corresponding number was 2.3.

35

Table 11
Expenditure on Active Labour Market Policies (%GDP)
(In brackets, we present the figure normalised on the percent unemployment rate)

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Norway
New Zealand
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
UK
US

1985

1989

1993

1998

0.42 (0.051)
0.27 (0.075)
1.31 (0.12)
0.64 (0.062)
1.14 (0.13)
0.90 (0.18)
0.66 (0.065)
0.80 (0.11)
1.52 (0.087)
0.17 (0.065)
1.16 (0.11)
0.61 (0.23)
0.90 (0.25)
0.33
0.33 (0.015)
2.10 (0.88)
0.19 (0.079)
0.75 (0.067)
0.25 (0.035)

0.24 (0.039)
0.27 (0.084)
1.26 (0.16)
0.51 (0.068)
1.13 (0.12)
0.97 (0.26)
0.73 (0.078)
1.03 (0.18)
1.41 (0.096)
0.16 (0.070)
1.25 (0.15)
0.81 (0.17)
0.93 (0.13)
0.48
0.85 (0.050)
1.54 (1.10)
0.21 (0.12)
0.67 (0.093)
0.23 (0.044)

0.71 (0.065)
0.32 (0.080)
1.24 (0.14)
0.66 (0.058)
1.74 (0.17)
1.69 (0.10)
1.25 (0.11)
1.53 (0.19)
1.54 (0.099)
1.36 (0.13)
0.09 (0.036)
1.59 (0.24)
1.15 (0.19)
0.79 (0.083)
0.84 (0.15)
0.50 (0.022)
2.97 (0.34)
0.38 (0.095)
0.57 (0.054)
0.21 (0.030)

0.42 (0.053)
0.44 (0.098)
1.42 (0.15)
0.50 (0.052)
1.66 (0.32)
1.40 (0.12)
1.30 (0.11)
1.26 (0.14)
1.54 (0.21)
1.12 (0.095)
0.09 (0.022)
1.74 (0.42)
0.90 (0.27)
0.63 (0.084)
0.78 (0.15)
070 (0.037)
1.97 (0.24)
0.77 (0.22)
0.34 (0.054)
0.17 (0.038)

Source: OECD Employment Outlook, 2001, Table 1.5

36

Table 12
Collective bargaining coverage (%)

Austria
Australia
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1994

n.a.
85
80
35
67
95
n.a.
90
n.a.
91
n.a.
100
n.a.
65
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
67
29

n.a.
85
80
33
68
95
n.a.
90
n.a.
90
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
65
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
67
27

n.a.
85
80
36
68
95
n.a.
90
n.a.
88
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
65
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
68
27

n.a.
85
85
39
70
95
n.a.
90
n.a.
85
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
65
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
72
24

n.a.
85
90
40
72
95
85
91
n.a.
85
28
76
n.a.
70
70
68
n.a.
n.a.
70
21

n.a.
85
90
39
74
95
n.a.
90
n.a.
85
n.a.
80
n.a.
70
n.a.
70
n.a.
n.a.
64
21

99
80
90
38
69
95
92
90
n.a.
83
23
n.a.
67
70
79
76
86
53
54
18

99
80
90
36
69
95
95
92
n.a.
82
21
85
31
70
71
78
89
53
40
17

These data were collected by Wolfgang Ochel. Further details may be found in Ochel (2000).

37

Table 13
Union Density (%)

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany (W)
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Norway
New Zealand
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
UK
USA

1960-64

1965-72

1973-79

1980-87

1988-95 1996-98

Extension
laws in
place (a)

48
59
40
27
60
35
20
34
47
25
33
41
52
36
61
9
64
35
44
27

45
57
42
29
61
47
21
32
51
32
33
38
51
35
61
9
66
32
47
26

49
52
52
35
71
66
21
35
56
48
30
37
52
38
61
9
76
32
55
25

49
51
52
37
79
69
16
34
56
45
27
30
55
37
57
11
83
29
53
20

43
45
52
36
76
76
10
31
51
40
24
24
56
35
34
16
84
25
42
16

9
9
9
X
X
9
9
9
X
9
X
9
X
X
9
9
X
9 (b)
X
X

35
39
36
76
80
10
27
43
37
22
24
55
21
25
18
87
23
35
14

Notes
(i)

Union density = union members as a percentage of employees. In both Spain and Portugal, union
membership in the 1960s and 1970s does not have the same implications as elsewhere because there was
pervasive government intervention in wage determination during most of this period.

(ii)

(a)

Effectively, bargained wages extended to non-union firms typically at the behest of
one party to the bargain.

(b)

Extension only at the behest of both parties to a bargain. For details, see OECD (1994), Table
5.11.

(iii)

Source: Ebbinghaus and Visser (2000).

38

Table 14
Co-ordination Indices (Range 1-3)

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany (W)
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Norway
New Zealand
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
UK
US

1960-64
1
2

1965-72
1
2

1973-79
1
2

1980-87
1
2

1988-95
1
2

1995-99
2

2.25
3
2
1
2.5
2.25
1.75
3
2
1.5
3
2
2.5
1.5
1.75
2
2.5
2.25
1.5
1

2.25
3
2
1
2.5
2.25
1.75
3
2
1.5
3
2
2.5
1.5
1.75
2
2.5
2.25
1.5
1

2.25
3
2
1
2.5
2.25
1.75
3
2
1.5
3
2
2.5
1.5
1.75
2
2.5
2.25
1.5
1

2.25
3
2
1
2.4
2.25
1.84
3
2
1.5
3
2
2.5
1.32
1.84
2
2.41
2.25
1.41
1

1.92
3
2
1
2.26
2.25
1.98
3
3
1.4
3
2
2.5
1
2
2
2.15
2.25
1.15
1

1.5
2
2
1
2
2.5
1.5
2.5
3
2.5
2.5
3
2
1
2
2
2
1.5
1
1

2
2.5
2
1
3
1.5
2
2.5
2
1.94
2.5
3
3
2.5
3
3
3
2
1.56
1

2
2.5
2
1
3
1.69
2
2.5
2.38
1.73
2.5
2.56
3
2.5
3
3
3
2
1.77
1

2.36
2.5
2.1
1.63
2.96
2
2
2.5
2.91
2
2.5
2
2.96
2.5
2.56
2.64
3
2
1.77
1

2.31
2.5
2.55
1.08
2.54
2
2
2.5
2.08
1.81
2.5
2.38
2.72
2.32
1.58
2.3
2.53
2
1.08
1

1.63
2.42
2
1
2.42
2.38
1.92
2.5
2.75
1.95
2.5
3
2.84
1.25
1.88
2
1.94
1.63
1
1

Notes
The first series (1) only moves in response to major changes, the second series (2) attempts to capture all the
nuances. Co-ordination 1 was provided by Michèle Belot to whom much thanks (see Belot and van Ours, 2000, for
details). Co-ordination 2 is the work of Wolfgang Ochel, to whom we are most grateful (see Ochel, 2000a). Coordination 1 appears in all the subsequent regressions.

39

Table 15
Employment Protection (Index, 0-2)

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany (W)
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Norway
New Zealand
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
UK
USA

1960-64

1965-72

1973-79

1980-87

1988-95

1998

0.50
0.65
0.72
0.30
0.90
1.20
0.37
0.45
0.02
1.92
1.40
1.35
1.55
0.80
0.00
2.00
0.00
0.55
0.16
0.10

0.50
0.65
1.24
0.30
0.98
1.20
0.68
1.05
0.19
1.99
1.40
1.35
1.55
0.80
0.43
2.00
0.23
0.55
0.21
0.10

0.50
0.84
1.55
0.30
1.10
1.20
1.21
1.65
0.45
2.00
1.40
1.35
1.55
0.80
1.59
1.99
1.46
0.55
0.33
0.10

0.50
1.27
1.55
0.30
1.10
1.20
1.30
1.65
0.50
2.00
1.40
1.35
1.55
0.80
1.94
1.91
1.80
0.55
0.35
0.10

0.50
1.30
1.35
0.30
0.90
1.13
1.41
1.52
0.52
1.89
1.40
1.28
1.46
0.80
1.93
1.74
1.53
0.55
0.35
0.10

0.50
1.10
1.00
0.30
0.70
1.00
1.40
1.30
0.50
1.50
1.40
1.10
1.30
0.80
1.70
1.40
1.10
0.55
0.35
0.10

Note
These data are based on an interpolation of the variable used by Blanchard and Wolfers (2000), to whom we are
most grateful. This variable is based on the series used by Lazear (1990) and that provided by the OECD for the
late 1980s and 1990s. Since the Lazear index and the OECD index are not strictly comparable, the overall series is
not completely reliable. The 1998 number is taken from Nicoletti et al. (2000), Table A3.11 (1st col. rescaled).

40

Table 16
Total Taxes on Labour
Payroll Tax Rate plus Income Tax Rate plus Consumption Tax Rate
Total Tax Rate (%)

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany (W)
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Norway
New Zealand
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
UK
USA

1960-64

1965-72

1973-79

1980-87

1988-95

28
47
38
31
32
38
55
43
23
57
25
45
20
19
41
30
34
34

31
52
43
39
46
46
57
44
30
56
25
54
52
25
23
54
31
43
37

36
55
44
41
53
55
60
48
30
54
26
57
61
29
26
29
68
35
45
42

39
58
46
42
59
58
65
50
37
56
33
55
65
30
33
40
77
36
51
44

59
49
50
60
64
67
52
41
67
33
47
61
41
46
78
36
47
45

1996-2000
66
51
53
61
62
68
50
33
64
37
43
60
39
45
77
36
44
45

Note: These data are based on the London School of Economics, Centre for Economic Performance OECD
dataset.

41

Table 17
From the Early 1980s to the Late 1990s
“Policy” Changes
Replacement
Rate

Benefit
Duration

Benefit
Strictness

ALMP

Union
Coverage

Union
Density

Coordination

Europe
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Ireland
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
UK

X
√
X
√
X
X
X
√
X
XX
√

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

√
√
√
√

√√
√
√
√
√
√
√
X

X
?
X
√√

√
X
√
√√
√

X
X
X
√
X
√
√
√
X
X
X
-

Non-Europe
Australia
Canada
Japan
New Zealand
US

√
X
-

X
-

√

√
X
-

√√
-

√

√

X
XX
-

√
-

Notes:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
(ix)
(x)

√ implies “good” shift, X implies “bad” shift.
See Table 8. Replacement rate change (1980-87 to 1999) greater than 0.04 implies X, less than –0.04
implies √. Double X or √ for changes in excess of 0.25. The latter does not apply to Italy because the
figure in the 1999 column refers to so few people.
See Table 9. Duration index change (1980-87 to 1999) greater than 0.1 implies X, less than
-0.1 implies √. Double X or √ for changes in excess of 0.5.
See Table 10 and the discussion in OECD (2000), Chapter 4. Author’s judgment based on this
information.
See Table 11. Change (1985/9 to 1993/8) greater than 0.2 implies √, less than –0.2 implies X. Double √
or X for changes in excess of 0.5. Bracketed amount must move in the same direction by 0.05.
See Table 12. Coverage change (1980 to 1994) greater than 0.1 implies X, less than –0.1 implies √.
Double X or √ for changes in excess of 0.3.
See Table 13. Density change (1980-87 to 1996-8) greater than 10 implies X, less than –10 implies √.
Double X or √ for changes in excess of 30.
See Table 14. Co-ordination (Type 2) change (1980-87 to 1995-99) greater than 0.5 implies √, less than –
0.5 implies X. Double X or √ for changes in excess of 1.0.
See Table 15. Employment protection change (1980-87 to 1998) greater than 0.2 implies √, less than –0.1
implies X.
See Table 16. Taxes change (1980-87 or 1988-95 to 1996-2000) greater than 0.07 implies X, less than –
0.07 implies √.

42

Table 17 – cont’d
Employment
Protection

Labour
Taxes

√

Total
X

Unemployment
1980-87
2000-01

Unemployment
Change

Europe
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Ireland
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
UK

√
√
√
X
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
-

X
√
X
√
√

1
2
4
2
1
2
4
2
5
3
4
2
1
1
6

3
1
2
2
4
1
1
2
0
3
2
1
2
4
2

3.1
11.2
7.0
5.1
8.9
6.1
13.8
6.7
10.0
2.4
7.8
17.6
2.3
1.8
10.5

3.7
6.8
4.4
9.4
9.0
6.4
4.0
8.4
2.6
3.6
4.1
13.5
5.5
2.6
5.2

0.6
-4.4
-2.6
4.3
0.1
0.3
-9.8
1.7
-7.4
1.2
-3.7
-4.1
3.2
0.8
-5.3

Non-Europe
Australia
Canada
Japan
New Zealand
US

-

?
X
?
-

3
1
0
3
1

1
2
1
3
0

7.7
9.7
2.5
4.7
7.6

6.5
7.0
4.9
5.7
4.4

-1.2
-2.7
2.4
1.0
-3.2

43

Figure 1
Unemployment/Vacancy Loci in France, Germany and Spain

France
25
labour shortage index*

90
01

20
15
80

75

10

85
95

5
3

4

5

6
7
8
9 10
unemployment rate (%)

11

12 13

11

12 13

West Germany
2

vacancy rate (%)

01

1.5
80

1

90

95

75

.5

85

0
3

4

5

6
7
8
9 10
unemployment rate (%)

44

Spain

vacancy rate (%)

1.5

1
01

.5

90

85
95

80

0
5

10
15
20
unemployment rate (%)

25

45

Figure 2
Unemployment/Vacancy Loci in Britain, Denmark, Netherlands

Britain

labour shortage index*

15

10

75 01
90
95

5

85

80

0
3

4

5

6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13
unemployment rate (%)

Denmark

vacancy rate (%)

.15
95

90

.1
85

.05

75
01

80

0
3

4

5

6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13
unemployment rate (%)

46

Netherlands
3

vacancy rate (%)

01

2

90

75

1

80
95
85

0
3

4

5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13
unemployment rate (%)

47

