A practical process for implementing a bail-in
resolution power
Speech given by
Andrew Gracie, Director, Special Resolution Unit, Bank of England

At the British Bankers’ Association, London
17 September 2012

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Introduction

In November 2011, the leaders of the G20 endorsed the Financial Stability Board’s international standards
for resolution regimes, the Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions (Key
Attributes). These standards form part of a global solution to a global problem—that of “too-big-to fail” and
the avoidance of state-sponsored bail-out of the biggest international banks - or G-SIFIs1 in the parlance of
the FSB. They mandate the introduction of a set of resolution tools that should be available to all national
authorities—tools that are expressly designed in the resolution of a G-SIFI to achieve the continuity of its
critical economic functions, thereby avoiding systemic disruption, and in the process ensuring that public
funds are not exposed to loss. The tools include the ability to transfer or sell assets and liabilities of G-SIFIs
and to carry out a bail-in of creditors within resolution.

Some progress towards implementing the Key Attributes has been achieved across the G20. The passing of
the Dodd-Frank Act in 2010 provides the US with a regime that is broadly compliant with the Key Attributes.
The development of the Recovery and Resolution Directive (RRD) should leave Europe in a similar position.
In the UK, the proposed RRD and anticipated legislation on non-bank resolution will significantly enhance the
existing bank resolution framework under the UK Banking Act 2009.

As part of the implementation of the Key Attributes, supervisors and resolution authorities around the world
are in the process of developing concrete resolution strategies for all G-SIFIs. These resolution strategies
are designed to ensure that the failure of a G-SIFI should be orderly and should avoid exposing public funds
to loss. Rather, the creditors of the failing banks should bear losses, as they would do in insolvency, but
without the financial instability and disruption to critical functions that the sudden insolvency of a G-SIFI
would otherwise cause.

In some cases, the preferred resolution strategy may be to expose creditors to loss by transferring critical
parts of their business to solvent entities - a private sector purchaser or some form of bridge bank - leaving
creditors behind in an administration. In other cases, in particular for G-SIFI’s whose operations are too
large, complex or interconnected to split without threatening the critical services that the bank provides, the
bail-in power may be used to ensure creditors are exposed to losses without disrupting critical functions.

But bail-in cannot, and should not, be used in isolation from other tools and powers. Writing down and
converting debt into equity may help to restore solvency, but on its own it cannot restore viability. And it
cannot and should not be used simply to keep a loss-making business artificially alive. Rather, its role,
similar to that of a corporate restructuring under Chapter 11 of the US Bankruptcy Code, is to help keep a
bank’s vital operations functioning, and avoid the disorder that would result from the bank suddenly ceasing

1

29 global systemically important financial institutions were identified by the FSB and Basel Committee on Banking Supervision in
November 2011.
2

All speeches are available online at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2

to trade, whilst it is reorganised, replacing management and restructuring the business as necessary. A
credible bail-in, including the necessary restructuring, should enable the firm to access market liquidity.

Bail-in, like other resolution tools, involves some interference with property rights. But safeguards will apply
which will ensure that no creditor is left worse off than they would have fared in a counterfactual insolvency.
In keeping with that, it is important that bail-in follows the creditor hierarchy, secured claims are protected
and netting arrangements are respected. And bail-in, like the other resolution tools, can only be used when
it is necessary to do so in pursuit of clearly defined public interest objectives.

Bail-in in practice

The Bank of England, alongside other domestic and international authorities, has been working to ensure
that bail-in can be implemented effectively. Applying it will involve overcoming legal, operational and
financial challenges. But these challenges are surmountable and are being addressed — through legislation,
through cross-border dialogue and resolution planning, and through changes to market practice. In the
remainder of this presentation I shall set out in practical terms how a bail-in could work for a G-SIFI,
highlighting some of the associated practical challenges along the way.

Pre-resolution
Well in advance of resolution, it will be necessary, to ensure that G-SIFIs have appropriate loss absorbency2.
This would ensure that the G-SIFI has sufficient liabilities that could bear losses within resolution. Both the
RRD and the UK’s Independent Commission on Banking (ICB) recommend that such firms be required to
hold loss absorbing capacity beyond their Basel 3 capital requirements. This is a regulatory requirement,
nothing to do with the bail-in power itself.

Any loss absorbency requirement would need to take account of cross-border enforceability. Hence the
desirability of including some form of minimum requirement within the RRD. But any requirement would
need to ensure that the relevant non-EEA liabilities of an EU bank could also be subject to bail-in.
As I have said, national authorities are also co-operating in drawing up resolution strategies and plans for
G-SIFIs, using information provided by the firms themselves. They will also draw up firm-specific
cross-border co-operation agreements setting out how they would co-operate to implement the plans in
practice. This will help to establish a presumptive path for how the failure of a G-SIFI would be handled as it
slid towards and into resolution.

2

RRD Articles 39 and 40 would require authorities to ensure that firms maintain a minimum amount of liabilities eligible for bail-in.
Although their proposal does not establish a common quantitative minimum amount, the Commission suggests that 10% of total
liabilities might be an appropriate amount.
3

All speeches are available online at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

3

Should a firm encounter difficulties which potentially threaten its viability, the first line of defence is the
actions that the firm itself may take or be required to take in an attempt to restore viability and recapitalise its
balance sheet. During this “recovery” phase the firm might seek to reduce its balance sheet exposures and
raise new capital, including through rights issues and divestments. The firm might attempt to restructure its
outstanding liabilities through negotiations with creditors; and it might trigger the conversion into equity of
contingent capital instruments (CoCos). The RRD provides supervisory authorities with a suite of early
intervention tools—to supplement those already provided for in the European Capital Requirements
Directives—to ensure, where necessary, that adequate action is taken.

However, notwithstanding the firm’s best efforts, its attempts at “recovery” might fail. Resolution tools,
including bail-in, would only be used if efforts to avoid the firm reaching the point of non-viability are
unsuccessful. That point is reached when the supervisory authority identifies that the institution was failing,
or likely to fail, and that no other solution, absent the use of resolution tools, would restore the institution to
viability within a reasonable timeframe. Additionally, resolution powers would only be used if it was
necessary to employ them in order to meet clearly defined public interest objectives, for example the
maintenance of financial stability and the protection of depositors3.

Following the entry of the firm into resolution, the authorities would then take a formal decision on which of
the resolution powers at their disposal to use. Bail-in is only one of the tools that could be used and
strategies that could be followed but, given the attention it attracts in the RRD, I will concentrate on it today.
Neither the Key Attributes nor the RRD set out in detail the process to be followed to put a bail-in into effect.
But work which we at the Bank of England have conducted suggests that a process for implementing a
bail-in could consist of four key steps: 1) stabilisation; 2) valuation and exchange; 3) relaunch; and
4) restructuring.

1. Stabilisation

The first stages of a bail-in should focus on stabilisation. Ideally a firm would enter resolution at
close-of-business on a Friday evening, which would provide the authorities approximately 48 hours in which
to stabilise the firm outside market hours. But this cannot be guaranteed. If a firm reached the point of
non-viability during the middle of the week, it would be necessary to commence resolution proceedings at
that point.

Many of the steps during the “resolution weekend” would be operational. It is likely the listing and exchange
trading of the firm’s shares would be suspended or cancelled4. A formal change of control process would be

3

Articles 26 and 27 of the RRD provide for this approach.
Article 42(1) would require the cancellation or severe dilution of shares. This may need to be amended, to allow a share transfer to be
effected (whilst having the same economic impact on existing shareholders).
4

4

All speeches are available online at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

4

required in order to affect the transfer. Debt instruments might also be suspended from listing or trading5.
At this point, the resolution authorities would have the power to take control of the institution and exercise all
the rights conferred upon the shareholders6. Communication with the market and other stakeholders would
be carefully managed. The firm’s entry into resolution would be announced publicly before major financial
markets reopen (likely Sunday evening for the purposes of meeting Asian market openings), and dialogue
with key stakeholders may be required during the resolution weekend itself. The authorities would make the
following public announcements:


First, that the authorities had found that the firm had reached the point of non-viability and had met
the conditions for resolution;



Second, the broad resolution strategy that was being executed, for example bail-in without splitting
the group structure. Under such a resolution strategy, the authorities would state that through the
write down and conversion of the firm’s liabilities, solvency would be restored, and core functions
would continue to be performed on a solvent, viable basis;



Third, in order to make the previous statement credible the authorities would specify: a) the range of
liabilities that would be completely written down without conversion (likely to be shareholders and
potentially subordinated debt holders); and b) the range of liabilities that would be subject to potential
write-down and / or fully or partial converted into equity through the use of the bail-in tool.



Fourth, that the firm would be restructured but that all of the firm’s core functions would continue
without disruption, and that any insured depositors would be fully protected — as is always the case;
and



Fifth, the proposed timing for the announcement of the final terms for the bail-in, including the final
extent of creditor write-downs, and rates of conversion to equity.

The aim of these announcements would be to stabilise the position of the firm and provide retail investors
and market counterparties with confidence.

2. Valuation and exchange

Immediately following the resolution weekend, an intensive valuation period would commence in order to
determine the extent of losses incurred or likely to be incurred by the firm and therefore the appropriate
terms of the bail-in. This process would build on preliminary valuation work conducted prior to the resolution.

The creditors identified in the announcement at the resolution weekend would be subject to write-downs
which in aggregate covered all of the firm’s losses. These write-downs would be determined in a manner

5
6

Article 48(2)(b)
Article 56(1)(b)
5

All speeches are available online at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

5

that: first, respects the creditor hierarchy7; second, stands up to proportionality requirements in order to
minimise the risk of compensation claims8; and third, is clear and transparent to creditors9. These are all
requirements of the RRD which we support.
The obligation that creditors are treated equally within classes10 we do not. It is important for the resolution
authority in deciding which liabilities to include within the scope of the bail-in to retain some discretion,
especially within the senior creditor class, to take account of any potential adverse impact on system stability
of bailing in particular liabilities or types of liability.

The authorities, in this case the prudential supervisor, would then determine the amount of capital that would
be necessary to help restore the firm to viability. This quantum would likely be larger than the normal
minimum prudential capital requirements in order to ensure market confidence. This recapitalisation
requirement would be met through converting eligible liabilities into equity, again subject to the safeguards
and requirements outlined above.

It is important to note that the valuation conducted for the purposes of determining the quantum of
write-downs and conversions into equity should be separate from the independent valuation of a
counterfactual insolvency, which would be conducted to determine whether and if so how much
compensation creditors may be due. The valuation basis for the former should be closer to a fair value; and
for the latter, liquidation value based on certain assumptions about the liquidation process would be more
appropriate; although we do not consider it necessary to specify in advance the precise methodology to be
employed. There may need to be some technical amendments to the RRD in order to secure this11. But the
difference between the two valuations would serve to show the value destruction avoided by the bail-in, let
alone any wider systemic impact averted.

Valuation for the purpose of determining the extent of losses should be conducted on a broadly fair value
basis, and the haircut on creditors should be large enough to ensure that the firm can be recapitalised and
does not lapse back into resolution. Where junior creditors or shareholders have borne losses on the bail-in
which are greater than the counterfactual insolvency, they could be compensated through ex post
adjustment mechanisms in the capital stack.

The extent of losses at the firm pre-resolution, and the degree to which those losses were easily identifiable
and isolated, would have implications for the timing of the valuation process. If losses were isolated within a
7

Article 29(1) (b) establishes the principle the creditors should bear losses in accordance with the priority of their claims and
Article 29(1) (e) the principle that creditors of the same class are treated in an equitable (but not necessarily equal) manner.
8
Article 65 provides for a “No Creditor Worse Off” protection for shareholders and creditors subject to the bail-in and partial transfer
powers. Authorities are required by Article 27(2) (c) to demonstrate that action is necessary in the public interest.
9
Article 75
10
Article 43 would require that creditors in the same creditor class bear losses equally in a resolution bail-in. This provision applies
uniquely to the bail-in tool.
11
Specifically, Article 65 requiring a valuation for the purposes of determining the amount, if any, of compensation required under the
“no creditor worse off” safeguard should be decoupled from the provisions in Article 30 for making a valuation to inform the choice of
resolution actions to be taken.
6

All speeches are available online at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

6

business unit or legal entity, and limited to a single asset class, it should be possible to conduct an effective
valuation rapidly. If losses were pervasive and difficult to identify or isolate, or the assets were complex and
hard to value, it may take several months before exchange could be enacted12. In fact there may be cases
where losses and problems in a firm are so thorough-going that a bail-in is not viable and a firm needs to be
wound down instead, bridging the systemic functions that need to be preserved. The ring fencing of
particular functions provided by the ICB may be helpful in such cases.

3. Relaunch

Once the valuation had been completed, and creditors written-down as appropriate, equity would need to be
assigned to the affected creditors as a quid pro quo for their recapitalisation. This could happen in one of two
ways: issuing new shares or transferring existing de-listed shares from the wiped-out shareholders. There
may be some operational advantages in the latter option, although the RRD does not seem to contemplate
it13. Once the written-down debt instruments and equity have been assigned to the bailed-in creditors,
primary market equity and debt trading should resume.
During this process, a number of practical considerations would likely arise14 including any regulatory
change-of-control approvals. Equity stakes that could not be transferred directly to creditors would need to
be distributed in the market.

As mentioned, ex-post adjustment mechanisms would also likely be required as a means of distributing
compensation value to bailed-in creditors. The specific application of such instruments would be
case-specific and should be determined during the valuation process.
4. Restructuring

As described, recapitalisation via bail-in should be accompanied by a concrete and effective restructuring
strategy as mandated by the RRD15. Such a restructuring strategy should prevent disruption to the provision
of critical economic functions while directly addressing the causes of the firm’s failure. In all instances, this
restructuring would replace culpable management and address the firm’s governance failures. The
restructuring strategy should not focus on keeping the firm alive for the sake of continuity or on value
preservation per se, but should instead have regard principally to the financial stability of the markets in
which the firm operates.

12

For this reason, it should be clarified in the RRD that the requirement in Article 30(1) to conduct a preliminary valuation before
resolution is taken should not prevent authorities from taking the initial steps described above to stabilise the firm before a bail-in is
formally executed.
13
As noted above, Article 42(1) would require the cancellation or severe dilution of shares.
14
Article 49(3) provides for authorities to require that there are no procedural impediments to the conversion of liabilities to ordinary
shares by virtue of their instruments of incorporation or statutes, including pre-emption rights and requirements to authorise increases in
share capital. The RRD provides for amendments to Company Law Directives and the Shareholders Rights Directive to allow this.
15
Article 47
7

All speeches are available online at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

7

The extent of the problems at the firm pre-resolution would determine the scale of the restructuring required.
If the problems pre-resolution were isolated and contained to individual business lines – eg a “rogue trader”
or sector-specific asset losses – and identifiable, it is conceivable that the extent and scope of the
restructuring required would be limited. Such a restructuring would focus on unwinding selected
loss-generating business lines and/or removing problem assets from the banks’ balance sheet. Following
resolution and agreement of a restructuring plan, authorities should be able to exit the firm rapidly,
privatisation or relisting should occur quickly, and counterparty relationships should remain intact.

On the other hand, in the scenario in which deep losses were experienced across multiple business lines,
and the losses themselves were difficult to identify, value or isolate, much of the group would be rendered
non-viable. The restructuring would need to be extensive and, at the extreme, may require the controlled and
solvent unwind of the entire group.

The appropriate timeframe for the development and implementation of a restructuring plan would be
case-specific. It may range from a matter of months in the simplest cases where problems are contained and
easily isolated or longer in more complex scenarios16.

The public authorities may need to be significantly involved in the restructuring process, particularly if the
restructuring were extensive and critical business lines needed to be exited or unwound. The role of the
public authorities should move from active intervention to supervisory oversight once a formal restructuring
plan has been agreed and once new management has been installed.

Implications

As described above, we are moving closer to an operational bail-in regime. A number of outstanding
challenges remain, but these challenges are largely surmountable. Inevitably, many details still need to be
worked out, but many are case-specific and should not be set in stone within an industry-wide bail-in
framework.

The RRD, in line with the FSB Key Attributes, offers a pan European resolution toolkit that includes bail-in.
The RRD proposals provide for a means of implementing bail-in in a coordinated and sensible manner. We
look forward to working with our European counterparts to see the proposed RRD translated into law.

Before closing, I would like to stress once again that bail-in should be considered one tool among several
that ensures a bank can be resolved by assigning losses to shareholders and creditors rather than public
funds. As with other tools, it can ensure continuity of critical economic functions for as long as they remain

16

Article 47(1) indicates that the business reorganisation plan may be required to be produced within one month of the resolution. There
may need to be some flexibility around this to allow for complex cases.
8

All speeches are available online at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

8

critical. In this way, the objectives of the Key Attributes can be met and the long-run stability of the system
enhanced.

9

All speeches are available online at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

9

