A Shift in the Balance of Risks
Speech given by
David Walton, Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England

18 May 2006

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

For the past nine months, the Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of England has left interest
rates unchanged at 4.5%. But, as the minutes revealed yesterday, at the most recent MPC meeting on
3-4 May, I dissented from the majority view to vote for a 25 basis points interest rate increase. I
would like briefly to explain the reasons for my vote.
The Committee’s latest projections for consumer price inflation were published in last week’s
Inflation Report. When conditioned on unchanged interest rates at 4½ per cent, the Committee’s
central projection was for inflation to rise above the government’s 2 per cent target in the near term
and then to remain slightly above target throughout the next two years (see Chart 1). While there is
no mechanical link between these projections and policy decisions, I judge that the balance of risks
to this central projection for inflation lie a little to the upside; hence my vote for higher rates.
Chart 1. May 2006 Inflation Report CPI inflation
projection based on constant nominal interest
rates at 4.5%

Note: The fan chart depicts the probability of various outcomes
for CPI inflation in the future. For a full description, see the
footnote to Chart 2 on page iv of the May Inflation Report.

What are these risks? First, I believe that there is a modest upside risk to the Committee’s central
projection for GDP growth, and hence inflation. In the central projection, GDP growth picks up a
little in the second quarter and then remains close to its long-run average throughout the forecast
period. Growth could easily be a bit stronger than this in the rest of 2006. After a period of weakness
during 2005, growth in the UK economy has been running close to trend in the past couple of
quarters. But there are indications from a broad range of business surveys that the pace of output
growth has now increased to an above-trend rate.

Looking at the expenditure components of GDP, there is still great uncertainty about the underlying
strength of household spending. The Committee, though, does not expect consumer spending growth
to be particularly strong in coming quarters. In the Committee’s central projection, consumer
spending grows a little below its post-war average rate of increase during the next couple of years.
There are risks in both directions. Households’ real disposable incomes will be squeezed by higher
energy prices and a continued rise in the effective tax rate but support for spending should come
from improving employment intentions, past rises in equity prices and the upturn in the housing
market seen in recent months.
I see upside risks to growth in two areas: exports and investment. The world economy continues to
grow at a robust rate and, of particular importance from a UK perspective, there are now indications
of much greater momentum in economic activity in the euro area. This is reflected in improved
export sentiment in UK business surveys.
These surveys have also signalled a notable strengthening in investment intentions recently after
several quarters of weak readings. Given healthy corporate cashflow and the historically low cost of
capital, it would be surprising if UK companies continued to stand apart from the strengthening trend
in capital spending that is evident worldwide.
Second, I see a small upside risk to inflation stemming from a little less spare capacity in the
economy currently than implied by the Committee’s central projection. The UK economy has had to
absorb a sizeable shock from higher energy prices since the end of 2003 and it is quite possible that
this has depressed temporarily the growth of potential output.1 Labour productivity growth ground to
a virtual halt in the year to 2005Q3. While this may mostly have been cyclical, it could also have
reflected a slower pace of capital accumulation and a drop in measured total factor productivity
growth if some capacity had been scrapped. Consistent with this, there has not been much net change
in capacity utilisation over the past couple of years according to business surveys, despite belowaverage recorded GDP growth.

1

For a detailed analysis of the oil shock and its implications for monetary policy, see “Has oil lost the capacity to
shock?” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Spring 2006.

The labour market has loosened – the unemployment rate has risen by 0.5 percentage points since
last summer – and wage inflation has remained subdued, but this is not conclusive evidence of
cyclical weakness. In the face of higher oil prices which raise firms’ costs, the real consumption
wage (ie the post-tax wage paid to workers deflated by consumer prices) must be lower than it would
otherwise have been in the absence of the oil shock, if firms are to maintain employment. Although
wage inflation has remained stable, and growth in the real consumption wage has eased (see Chart
2), this has not prevented a rise in the growth of the real product wage (ie the full cost of labour to
firms divided by the price firms get for their output).2 This suggests that some of the rise in
unemployment might have been related to structural factors.

Chart 2. Growth in real wages
Percentage changes on
a year earlier
7
Real production wage

6
5
4
3

Real consumption
wage

2
1
0
-1

1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005

Note: Real production wage uses GDP deflator at basic prices.
Real consumption wage uses National Accounts household
consumption deflator.

A third risk relates to commodity and import prices. In framing its projections, the Committee takes
the path for oil prices given by the futures market, which is currently fairly flat. The outlook is
highly uncertain but in the face of continued strong global growth, and periodic worries about
supply, the risks to oil prices are probably still to the upside. And there are big uncertainties too
about the future path of gas prices.
2

The extent to which the real consumption wage must fall depends on the size of the oil price change, the shares of oil
and labour in gross output and the degree of complementarity between factors of production. Following a doubling in oil
prices, estimates of the required fall in the real consumption wage to maintain employment range from 1 per cent to 2½
per cent. The required fall in the real consumption wage depends on how easily producers can compensate for higher
energy prices by substituting away from energy. The smallest fall in the real wage would be generated if energy use
could be adjusted flexibly so as to keep the energy share of gross revenue unchanged. The largest fall in the real wage
would be implied if instead the quantity of energy inputs had to be used in a fixed proportion to the output produced. For
further details, see reference in footnote 1.

After several years in which the level of UK import prices had been broadly stable, import price
inflation has turned positive over the past eighteen months. This mirrors trends in export price
inflation in the major industrialised economies, as well as China, and it is not just a reflection of
higher energy prices. In making its forecasts the Committee assumed a fairly sharp deceleration in
non-energy export price inflation in the major economies, and hence in UK import price inflation. I
am concerned that this may not materialise to the extent assumed in the central projection, without a
slowdown in the pace of global activity first.
The Monetary Policy Committee has little influence over any of these external price pressures but
they could nevertheless have an important bearing on the chances of meeting the inflation target.
A fourth concern relates to the stability of inflation expectations. These have drifted upwards a little
this year according to various surveys of households’ expectations. There has also been a rise of
about 30 basis points over the past six months or so in 5 year forward breakeven inflation rates from
the gilts market (see Chart 3). While these movements are not dramatic, they cannot be dismissed
either. With growth moving above trend and a risk of higher imported inflation, there is an increased
likelihood of a further shift upwards in inflation expectations.

Chart 3. Inflation expectations
Implied 5 year forward inflation rate

Per cent

BoE/NOP public
attitudes to inflation

5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006

Fifth, although difficult to measure with any precision, I judge that the stance of monetary policy is
currently somewhat accommodative. This is suggested by asset price developments, including the

renewed pickup in house price inflation since last autumn, rapid broad money growth, and a
strengthening in the growth of nominal demand. For the reasons that I have already given, I do not
believe that an accommodative policy stance is appropriate at the current time.
I readily accept that there are other risks that could cause growth to disappoint and inflation to
undershoot the target. These arguments were advanced by some of my colleagues on the Committee
and are summarised in the latest minutes. But for me, in weighing these various arguments, the
balance of risks has shifted a little too much to the upside on inflation for comfort. And that, I
believe, justifies a small tightening in monetary policy.
ENDS

