Alice in Euroland
Speech given by
Willem H. Buiter, Professor of International Macroeconomics, University of Cambridge and
Member, Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England

Southbank University, London
15 December 1998

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

ALICE IN EUROLAND1
Introduction
Economic and Monetary Union has arrived de facto. While it will not start de iure
until January 1, 1999, the co-ordinated rate cut by all Euroland central banks on
3 December 1998, was truly the first monetary policy decision of the ECB. The UK,
true to its tradition of joining new European institutional developments late and
reluctantly, will not participate in EMU until further notice.
The launch of EMU is a global political and economic event of the first order. Love it
or hate it, it will profoundly affect the lives of all those in Euroland, on the fringes of
Euroland and in the world at large.
The adoption of a common currency by 11 of the 15 EU members is an act without
precedent. While there are some analogies with the creation of a German monetary
union in the 19th century, with the Latin Monetary Union and indeed with the preWorld War I Gold Standard, the differences far outweigh the similarities.
The common currency will have important technical, economic consequences for both
participants and outsiders. First and foremost, however, EMU is a major step on the
road to ‘ever closer union’in Europe. It represents the opening of a new chapter in
the European federalists’agenda, a significant transfer of national sovereignty to a
supra-national institution. The federal European super state, however, is still quite
some distance away. Not only is the EU, or even Euroland, not a federal structure, it
is not even a confederacy . Calling it a proto-confederal structure would probably be
as close as one could get.
While few if any technical economic implications for further European co-ordination,
Cooperation, harmonisation and institutional development follow from the act of
monetary union, the political imperatives will give momentum to a whole range of such
developments. For example, the European Parliament, the body charged with the
political oversight of the ECB, will, for the first time, get a major role in supervising a
body with an important executive responsibility. I expect that the European Parliament
will sharpen its teeth on this oversight function, that it will like the sensation of being
involved in true Parliamentary oversight, and that it will use the leverage acquired this
way to extend its power throughout the domain of European supranational
competence.
1

Ian Begg has drawn my attention to a paper by Klaus Gretschmann with a similar title to mine:
“European Monetary Union; Alice in Wonderland or Malice in Blunderland? (Gretschmann [1991])
*
The opinions expressed are those of the author alone. They do not necessarily represent the views
and opinions of the Bank of England or of the other members of the Monetary Policy Committee.

1

In this lecture, I will focus mainly on the institutional arrangements and emerging
operating practices of the ECB, the ESCB and the emerging fiscal Cooperation and
co-ordination arrangements such as the EuroXI. I will approach these issues by asking
whether EMU will and be a success, and what institutional and operational features
contribute to or threaten its survival and success.
The Perils for EMU and the Perils of EMU
The recent Asian crisis, and its spill-overs as far away as South Africa and the Russian
Federation provide a useful reminder of the validity of my long-held view that, with
unrestricted international mobility of financial capital, a common currency becomes the
only exchange rate regime that is viable and permits the potential gains from capital
market integration to be realised in full. Fixed-but-adjustable pegs are accidents
waiting to happen. Market-determined or freely floating exchange rates are viable in
the technical sense that they can survive, but only at the cost of excessive volatility and
persistent misalignment inherent in the juxtaposition of a technically efficient financial
market with sluggish price and wage adjustment in key parts of the real economy. The
Euro was very well timed indeed.
Technical Survival Issues: Speculative Attacks and Voluntary Quits
EMU will survive almost surely. It cannot be brought down by speculative attacks
among member countries, either between January 1, 1999 and the date of the final
demonetisation of the national currencies (no later than July 1, 2002), or afterwards.
A speculative attack among EMU currencies could no more cause a collapse of EMU
than a switch from £5 notes into £10 notes could cause a collapse of UK monetary
union. Like any currency union, it could be brought down by one or more of the
constituent member states or regions choosing to leave the currency union. A country
could e.g. find the lack of a national monetary instrument prohibitively costly in the
face of a particularly unpleasant country-specific shock to its output market. While the
Maastricht and Amsterdam Treaties do not provide any mechanism for leaving EMU
(or indeed any other of the EU institutions and arrangements), a country that truly
wished to leave would no doubt be able to do so. The likelihood of this happening, in
the absence of a major economic or political calamity, is very remote, however. The
sudden emergence of massive unbalanced positions in foreign currencies alone would
cause nightmares to businessmen and policy makers and would provide bankruptcy
experts and lawyers with decades of gainful employment.
EMU will survive despite a poor start, with the shenanigans surrounding the
appointment of its first President. I am not referring to the fact that the French
government insisted on making the appointment of the first ECB President a political
issue. The presidency of the ECB is a political issue. It is quite proper that the
Euroland central bankers who thought they had settled the issue among themselves,
were reminded of their proper place by the elected politicians. What was depressing
was that the French president chose to make the presidency a nationality issue. This
violated the letter and the spirit of the Treaties. The gentlemen’s agreement that Mr.
Duisenberg would serve for only four years and would be succeeded by ‘a Frenchman’
(any Frenchman?) was truly a rogues’agreement. It is my hope and expectation that
the first incumbent will treat it with the respect it deserves.

2

Legitimacy, Openness and Accountability
The only real threat to the continued existence of EMU will be the popular perception
that the ECB lacks political legitimacy. This lack of legitimacy has two dimensions:
first, the lack of openness and accountability of the ECB and second the problem of
monetary integration being ahead of general political and institutional integration.
The lack of openness, transparency and accountability written into the statutes of the
ECB and apparently about to be reinforced by the ECB’s own ‘common law’
operating procedures could yet undermine the viability of the whole enterprise. It is to
be hoped that a culture of openness will nevertheless be established. The ’16 year rule’
for the publication of the minutes of the ECB (as close to ‘not now, not ever, never’as
one can get) does not bode well, however.
Mr Duisenberg is of course quite correct to refuse to testify before any of the national
parliaments. He (and the other members of the Board) should be answerable,
collectively and individually, to the European Parliament alone. Mr. Duisenberg could
spend the best part of the year on a travelling road show around the Euroland capitals
if he were to take that particular (French) request seriously. National central bank
governors should of course be answerable to their national parliaments, although they
too are mandated by the Treaties to act for the Union as a whole, and not as agents for
their national constituencies.
Publication of Individual Voting Records
In the Financial Times of 21 September, 1998, Dr. Otmar Issing asserts that the
Maastricht treaty specifies that the ECB's Governing Council may decide to make
public the outcome of its deliberations, but not the voting behaviour of its members.
In fact, in the Protocols annexed to the Maastricht treaty it is stated that (10.4) `The
proceedings of the meetings shall be confidential. The Governing Council may decide
to make the outcome of its deliberations public'. This is perfectly consistent with
publication of the individual voting records, provided the individual votes are defined
to be part of the outcome of the deliberations, rather than as part of the proceedings.
The legal fig-leaf for non-publication of the individual votes does not appear to be
attached securely.
Dr. Issing points also states: "The real issue is whether making the votes known to the
public effectively contributes to accountability". I agree. He goes on to say that
"Making individual member's voting behaviour public would encourage undesirable
scrutiny of members' voting patterns. This, in turn, would encourage external
pressures on the Council members, arising from local interests. Independence, granted
by the Treaty, would be at risk.' The same argument has been made by
Mr Duisenberg. In an interview published Monday, 29 June 1998 in the Frankfurter
Algemeine Zeitung, Mr Duisenberg is reported as saying “If the vote of the national
representative were known, there would be unpleasant questions with the aim of
pressuring” him in future votes. I consider this argument to get it exactly backwards.
National political authorities and other interested parties will undoubtedly try to put
pressure on `their' nationals serving on the ECB Board as well as on `their' national
central bank governors. This is against the spirit and letter of the Treaty, but it will

3

surely happen. The question is how the ECB Board members and national governors
can be most effectively shielded from such pressures.
Whatever the formal confidentiality of the ECB Council meetings and votes, the
national heads of government will know exactly who voted in favour of what, within
five minutes of a vote being taken. Six Executive Board members, eleven national
governors, countless staff and possibly a member of the Commission and the President
of the Council, will be present at the ECB Council meetings. Leaks, and even open
breaches of confidentiality arrangements will be the rule rather than the exception.
Extensive selective leaking and competitive briefing of the media by individual Council
members, behaviour characteristic of some influential continental European central
banks in the past, are poor substitutes for proper accountability.
The information required to bring effective pressure to bear will be available, de facto,
to the national political insiders. That information will not however, be formally
available to the bodies charged with supervising the ECB (the European Parliament in
the case of the ECB Board, and the national parliaments in the case of the national
central bank governors of the Euro area). Council members will be able to hide behind
the cloak of confidentiality, and to avoid having to justify or defend their yielding to
local political pressures. The exercise of undue influence is not deterred by secrecy
and confidentiality, but only by openness. Smoke-filled rooms and confidentiality are
more likely to allow the ECB mandate and independence to be perverted by national
political pressures than openness and the occasional short-term embarrassment that this
entails.
Confidentiality of the votes also destroys any vestige of individual accountability of
ECB board members. It encourages excessive consensus-seeking and compromise. If
enforced, it is likely to greatly enhance the power of the President relative to that of
the other members. The only defence of the other Board and Council members against
a complete Presidential monopoly of decision-making power is the extensive selective
leaking and competitive media briefings that have been a characteristic in the past of
the Bundesbank. It is a poor substitute for proper accountability.
There can be no effective accountability if the individual votes are not in the public
domain.
Publication of the Minutes
While I believe that the individual voting records should be in the public domain as
soon as possible, I also believe that the minutes should be on a non-attributed basis.
The reasons for this are practical. Verbatim transcripts, or even selected but attributed
opinions of individual members, would kill the usefulness of the Council meetings.
Members would come with prepared positions and statements which they would read
into the record. There would be no scope for open-minded discussion of alternative
courses of action, for ‘what-if’, counterfactual thought experiments. The formal
meetings would become set-pieces, for the record only. The real discussions would
move elsewhere, defeating the purpose of the publication of the minutes.
The foregoing is not a valid argument against a form of minutes that presents the key
facts and considerations that determined how each of the members voted. The ECB

4

has decided not to publish the minutes to avoid false signals to financial markets. In
the words of Duisenberg: “If we would do this (publish the minutes), we would
influence expectations of the markets ahead of the next meeting. We do not want to
do this.” (Frankfurter Algemeine Zeitung, Monday 29 June, 1998). By not publishing
(non-attributed) minutes that offer a fair summary of the Council meetings, all that is
achieved is that informed speculation by market participants is replaced by uninformed
speculation. While there are neat examples in non-co-operative game theory of
circumstances under which the release of more information worsens welfare, it is very
difficult to think of conditions relevant to the setting of monetary policy by the ECB
that would cause better and more timely information to worsen economic performance.
The argument is wholly unconvincing.
Transparent Outcomes vs. Transparent Procedures
It is not sufficient that the monetary policy actions, that is, the outcomes of the
monetary policy process, be transparent. The process itself, that is, the inputs, must be
transparent for proper democratic accountability. One sometimes hears the opinion
that while the Bundesbank’s procedures are completely non-transparent, the policy
actions, or the policy rule adopted by the Bundesbank were completely transparent, ant
that it is only the actions that matter. I disagree with this conclusion. One cannot have
this kind of paternalistic approach to economic policy making in a democratic society.
Monetary policy is entrusted to independent central banks as a safeguard against
opportunistic behaviour by elected politicians. An independent central bank is a
commitment device to ensure that the flexible and powerful monetary stabilisation
instrument is not used in the pursuit of short-term electoral or other party-political
advantage. The objectives of low inflation, financial stability and sustained growth and
employment are best served by removing the interest rate instrument from the rough
and tumble of partisan politics. By establishing an independent central bank, executive
responsibilities are delegated by the elected political authorities to an unelected body.
In a democratic society, such decision making by technocrats is only acceptable and
viable if the institution to which these decision are delegated is accountable to the
public at large and to its elected representatives. Accountability is a good in itself, as
well as an important instrument for quality control.
The ECB will have to learn that independence, far from being inconsistent with
openness and accountability, cannot, in a democratic society, survive without these
two awkward customers. The attitude of the ECB is typical of a central banking
tradition that views central banking as a sacred,. quasi-mystical vocation, a cult whose
priests perform the holy sacraments far from the prying eyes of the non-initiates. This
mystique of the central bank, and the excessive clubbishness and clannish behaviour, it
sometimes encourages, is both entirely unwarranted and a threat to the legitimacy of
the purposes the central bank is intended to serve: price stability, preventing and
coping with systemic financial risk and minimising the output and employment gaps.
The UK arrangements for central bank independence, while far from perfect, are in
most respects superior to those likely to be operated by the ECB.
There are signs, however, that the climate of opinion at the ECB may already be
changing. While still resolutely opposed to publication of the individual voting
records, Mr. Duisenberg has recently expressed his willingness to consider the
publication of a summary of the discussion at the ECB Council meetings, a procedure

5

that could well end up looking rather similar to the way the MPC minutes are prepared
at the Bank of England
The Legitimacy of the Transfer of National Sovereignty to the ECB.
Monetary union involves a transfer of national sovereignty to the central or Federal
level. Unless this transfer of power is perceived as legitimate by the residents of
Euroland, the authority of the institutions of the ECB and the ESCB will be questioned
and challenged by those who perceive themselves to be adversely affected by it.
Generally in the past, central banks have been created when a stronger and more
legitimate Federal governance structure was in place than is currently the case in the
EU. There have been exceptions. The seven provinces that formed the Dutch
Republic established a monetary union with only the weakest (con)federal political
institutions and with almost completely decentralised fiscal authority. Belgium and
Luxembourg have been in a monetary union since 1922 without far-reaching political
integration.
I have considerable sympathy for the long-standing German position that further
political integration should have accompanied (or even preceded) monetary union. On
the other hand, the whole European integration experiment, from the Coal and Steel
Community on, has been a political wolf dressed in economic sheep’s clothing. It has
been successful so far, and it could continue to do so. It is essential, however, that the
European Parliament act as an effective watchdog over the ECB. Accountability starts
there.
The Size of the ECB Governing Council
The ECB Council currently has 17 members, 6 executive board members and 11 NCB
governors. If all current EU members join EMU in due course, and if the current rule
of a seat for each Euroland NCB governor remains, there will be 21 members. With
enlargement to up to 25 EU members in prospect sometime during the next decade,
membership would top 30. A group of 17 is already too large for the serious and
productive exchange of views, discussion and group decision taking. A squad of 21
will be quite unwieldy. Thirty would be a mob. In contrast, the Bank of England’s
MPC has 9 members, the FOMC has 12, the 7 Board Members and 5 regional Reserve
Bank Presidents. The Bundesbank Council also has 17 members, 8 Board
(Directorate) members and the Presidents of the 9 Land Central Banks. This number
increased (by 2) with German unification. To remain an effective deliberative body,
the one country-one-vote principle will have to be given up sooner rather than later.
This of course would require an amendment to the Treaty.
The Lender of Last Resort Vacuum
The words ‘lender of last resort’do not occur in the Treaties. Systemic stability issues
are not addressed. That is the bad news. The good news is that the Treaties do not
rule out the ECB and the ESCB fulfilling the lender of last resort function. There is a
tradition among some central banks not to mention the existence of the lender of last
resort. Recognising its existence would create additional moral hazard. Bank
executives would be encouraged to engage in imprudent and excessively risky financial
operations in the knowledge that, should their bets succeed, they will get the reward,
while if their bets fail, the central bank and, ultimately the tax payer (including those
who pay the inflation tax) will pick up the tab. This seems unduly coy. Bagehot’s

6

lender of last resort only intervenes when there is systemic risk. Individual institutions
that are not large or strategic enough to cause systemic risk, can fail. For those too
large to fail, the second half of Bagehot’s dictum ‘in times or crisis, lend freely but at a
penal rate’should act as a sufficient deterrent. With liquidity crises that are not also
insolvency crises, all central bank financial assistance should be priced painfully. When
insolvency is the issue, all private equity must go out before any public money goes in,
and all senior management in the rescued institution should have much diminished
career prospects in the financial sector.
The information necessary for effective lender of last resort support is likely to be
decentralised. The authority to provide financial support must, however, be
centralised in Frankfurt. Any action by any ESCB member that has monetary
consequences has to be authorised in the centre. This tension between informational
decentralisation and centralised authority to extend funds is unavoidable. It will be felt
especially acutely during a financial crunch, when decisions have to be made at very
short notice. It should not be insurmountable. The Fed, after all, seems to be coping
reasonably well.
I hope and expect, that even if they are not telling us about it, the ECB and ESCB are
creating the informational and authority chains to effectively implement the lender of
last resort function at the level of Euroland as a whole.
The Tension Between Centralised Authority, and Operational and Informational
Decentralisation
In the ECB and ESCB there is no role for national central banks in the formulation,
design and implementation of monetary policy. Monetary policy will be made by the
ECB Council. The 11 NCB governors may get analytical back-up from their NCBs, in
order to arrive at a more informed opinion about the decision that is to be made
centrally. Similarly, the ECB staff will provide support for the 6 Board members. The
fact the NCB governors outnumber the ECB Board members 11 to 6 does not in any
way alter the fact that monetary policy is made centrally, and that all policy actions that
have monetary consequences (open market operations, foreign exchange sales and
purchases, changes in lending and borrowing rates) have to be authorised centrally.
The role of the NCBs is reduced to that of providing research support for the national
governors and to act as national branch banks of the ECB for the operational
implementation of some of the decisions taken at the centre. Mr Fazio’s wish for a
continued substantial role of the NCBs is an illusion.
The history of the Federal Reserve System provides a warning of what happens when
monetary policy authority is decentralised. The proto-confederal structure of the
original Federal Reserve System created by Congress in 1913 was replaced through the
Banking Act of 1935 by a substantially centralised structure. It took the banking crises
of the Great Depression to convince even the Americans of the need for a centralised,
unified monetary authority. The most recent example of a supranational monetary
system under which substantial policy autonomy resided with the ‘regional’or national
central banks was the rouble zone of the early CIS. This cannot be said to have been a
promising role model.
Why do a number of Euroland NCB governors appear to wish to retain substantial
national autonomy in a number of dimensions?

7

Personnel management issues. One perfectly understandable but quite unacceptable
reason is a natural reluctance to contemplate the large-scale redundancies among NCB
employees that would seem to be the logical implication of the loss of national
monetary policy.
The central banks of most Euroland members appear grossly overstaffed. Figures from
the Morgan Stanley Central Bank Directory for 1999 show that the 11 NCBs of
Euroland employ more than 53,200 staff. This is 2 percent down on a year ago. The
ECB currently employs about 550 staff, but this number is growing quite rapidly.
BY comparison, the Bank of England currently employs 25 percent fewer staff than
two years ago, at just over 3,100. The reduction in numbers reflects the loss of the
Bank of England’s regulatory and supervisory functions since 1997. The US Federal
Reserve system employs just over 23,200 staff. Only 17,00 of these are Washington
based. The rest is employed by the 12 Regional Reserve Banks. Most of the staff is
engaged in the Fed’s substantial regulatory and supervisory tasks. The ECB of course
has none of these.
Some of the central banks of the smaller EMU members (the Netherlands, Austria,
Ireland and Luxembourg) have actually increased the size of their staffs in the past
years. This is not surprising. In all except Ireland, there has been no national
monetary policy and no need to think about monetary policy for many years, with the
Netherlands and Austria effectively ‘on the D-mark’and Luxembourg in a currency
union with Belgium. Now their governors have to contribute to the debate about
monetary policy in a large economy that is rather closed to international trade. The
experience of a small economy that is very open to international trade is poor
preparation for that task. Some serious learning curves will have to be climbed.
National Financial Centre Protection and Patronage
By decentralising the administration of certain monetary policy functions of the ESCB,
NCBs can maintain some operational capabilities. National financial centres may
benefit from close physical proximity to the NCB charged with these tasks. This form
of operational decentralisation is likely to be somewhat inefficient, but otherwise
harmless.
Informational Decentralisation for the Lender of Last Resort Role.
Some NCBs have domestic supervisory and regulatory functions. These will be
retained. To the extent that the proper exercise of these functions requires actions that
have monetary implications (financial support, bail-outs, recapitalisations), the
authority for these actions cannot reside with the NCB but must be exercised by the
ECB. Information will often be local, and decentralised. Authority will be centralised
at the ECB. Over time, as Euroland-wide regulators and supervisors develop and
replace the national supervisors and regulators, this problem will become less acute.
Note, however, that whenever the central bank and the regulator/supervisor are
distinct entities, co-ordination between the agency with the firm-specific information
(the regulator/supervisor), the agency with the short-term deep pockets (the central
bank) and the agency with the long-term deep pockets (the ministry of finance) will be
essential and not straightforward. This will be as true in Euroland as it is in the UK
today.

8

Co-ordination of Monetary and Fiscal Policy
Co-ordination between monetary and fiscal policy in Euroland is likely to be a problem
at first. The Germano-Dutch wing of the ECB mistrusts the EuroXI as an attempt to
undermine the independence of the central bank. While this concern is certainly not
without merit, there appears to be little awareness among the ECB top that
independent agents can choose to co-ordinate their actions and that co-operation is
possible, and fruitful, even when the co-operating parties have non-coincident,
divergent objectives.
Getting the balance or mix between monetary and fiscal policy right is a challenge at
the best of times, even when there is a single monetary and a single fiscal authority.
Co-ordination between the ECB and eleven national finance ministries will be as much
a logistical challenge and a political problem.
The use of fiscal policy for cyclical stabilisation will be severely circumscribed in
Euroland until the average budgetary position of the member states is sufficiently
below the Stability and Growth Pact ceiling, to allow counter-cyclical increases in
public sector deficits to perform their normal cycle-amplitude dampening function.
The only alternative would be the non-enforcement of the budgetary ceilings. While
some shading will no doubt occur, I anticipate they will be a binding constraint on a
number of Euroland governments in the next two years.
Action to ward off an unexpected downturn will therefore have to be taken by the only
player with both bow and violin: the ECB. It is therefore most encouraging that its
recent action has demonstrated that this new institution can be serious about price
stability without suffering from rigor mortis.
Conclusion
EMU will succeed in generating greater Euroland-wide prosperity than would have
been likely under any alternative monetary arrangement. As regards macroeconomic
stability it will make a modest positive contribution, provided the national countries
redesign their automatic fiscal stabilisers to generate more strongly anti-cyclical
deficits.
Lower transaction costs and greater price transparency will help complete the single
market, limit price discrimination and other restrictive practices. These are worthy and
worthwhile gains, but it is unlikely to add up to a hill of beans.
A key issue for the continental EMU members is whether the impetus for structural
reform of labour, product and financial markets that was so noticeable in the run-up to
EMU will fizzle out now that the prize has been won. There are signs of PMF
syndrome or Post-Maastricht-Fatigue syndrome in a number of countries.
EMU does not create a technical, economic case for a greater degree of harmonisation
of regulatory, tax and subsidy policies, nor for a larger Federal European budget. The
greater market integration due to the gradual implementation of the Single European
Act will force national policy makers to harmonise taxation and regulation of highly
mobile factors of production. To the extent that EMU is indeed the next step in the

9

European Federalist agenda, it may create a political momentum towards a greater
degree of centralisation or harmonisation of certain aspects of economic and social life.
Mr Lafontaine’s recent calls for greater harmonisation of taxes on savings and
enterprises are unlikely to be silenced. Fundamentally, though, it is the real economic
integration delivered by Margaret Thatcher when she signed the Single European Act
that will deliver greater tax harmonisation through the markets. Margaret Thatcher as
the mid-wife of a federal Europe. Who would have thought it?
References
Klaus Gretschmann [1991], European Monetary Union; Alice in Wonderland or
Malice in Blunderland? Futures, September.

10

