Analytical Models of Financial Stability
Speech given by
Alastair Clark, Adviser to the Governor, Bank of England

At the Cass Business School
28 March 2007

Accompanying Slides

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2
1

[Introduction]

2

What I want to talk about this evening is work in progress on two levels.

First, the topic – analytic models of financial stability – is an area of active interest in
the Bank and elsewhere; but I do not think anyone would claim to have progressed
beyond the early stages of developing such models. Indeed, given the complexity of
the underlying issues, it may be some time before we have a really satisfactory
quantitative framework for analysing financial stability questions. But that does not
mean we should not try. Second, this talk is itself work in progress – more so than I
hoped when I originally agreed to give it! Leaving the Bank has proved a more timeconsuming business than I had anticipated. Nevertheless, I thought it might be
interesting to sketch out some of the challenges, as we see them, in trying to
understand what makes for a stable financial system, and in thinking about what
public policy can contribute to financial stability.

Background

3

Let me start with a few general observations.

4

First, it is now conventional to recognise, but nonetheless true, that when we

refer to “financial stability” we are often not entirely clear what we’re talking about –
or more accurately that different people may be talking about different things. Firsthand evidence of this is provided on the financial stability web site run by my
erstwhile colleague Phil Davis. Some define it, or rather its obverse “financial
instability”, in very broad terms to mean defects in the mechanism for allocating
savings to investment. To my mind, this goes too wide and potentially includes all
sorts of inefficiencies in financial intermediation which do not, in common sense
usage, constitute instability. But in the reverse direction, it is of course true that
instability can be an important source of inefficiency. Others have defined financial
instability in terms of volatility, or “excessive” volatility, in asset prices. From this
perspective, the mechanics of the financial system may function perfectly
satisfactorily at a micro level; the problem, if there is one, lies in the dynamic
characteristics of the system as a whole. Perversely, it may be that the more
successful we are in removing frictions in financial markets and in institutional

3
behaviour, the more likely it is that instability in this sense will occur. Allied to this,
a third approach is to draw an analogy with “stability” in the physical sciences – that
is to view the financial system as a kind of giant machine, and focus on the structural
characteristics which determine whether, when the system is disturbed, it tends to
dampen the disturbances and return to its starting point or fly off in some new
direction, or collapse. And finally, and perhaps closest to the “popular” view if such
exists, financial instability can be defined as arising when there is some substantial
discontinuity in the functioning of the financial system – institutional insolvency,
market unavailability, or whatever – on a scale which leads to significant costs for the
economy as a whole.

5

These various definitions clearly have elements in common and indeed they all

have merits in their own terms. My purpose in rehearsing them is not to recommend
a “best buy”. It is simply to emphasise that in constructing analytic models of
financial stability it is important to be clear which definition of stability is in mind.

6

A second general point is that, in contrast to its twin, monetary stability,

financial stability is not easily measured. You could argue about inflation rates,
exchange rates or monetary aggregates as optimal indicators of monetary conditions –
although you know where the Bank’s own preference lies. All of them are plausible
candidates and, crucially, each of them can be rooted in a model of how monetary
conditions relate to the wider economy and of how the transmission mechanisms for
monetary policy work. But as yet we have nothing similar for financial stability and
as a result no generally accepted metrics for determining whether the financial system
has become more or less stable. For those whose job it is to try to increase the
resilience of the financial system, this is a considerable handicap.

7

Third, specifically, it is important to be clear in talking about the potential

welfare costs of some external shock – external that is to the financial system –
whether the costs associated with the shock itself are to be included, or only the
additional costs incurred through so-called “amplification factors” – frictions of
various kinds – as the effects of the shock percolate through the system. In principle
the latter is probably the more sensible measure although in practice the two elements
may be difficult to disentangle.

4

8

A fourth general point is that the objective of financial stability analysis is, in

the broadest terms, to try to understand what is likely to happen in the tails of
probability distributions. It is unlikely that a financial crisis will develop if
everything evolves in the way most economic agents expect – for the simple reason
that if they see financial stresses coming they will probably take avoiding action.
This may not always be true; coordination problems may mean that adjustment is too
little or too late. But serious problems are more likely if the unexpected happens.
Behaviour in the tail of distributions is often not well understood and there is much
less data with which to try to analyse it.

9

Finally, and a related point, speed is of the essence in the development of

financial instability, certainly in the “discontinuity” sense. Even large shocks can be
accommodated if there is plenty of time to adjust – we saw this for example in the
reaction of the US banking system to the Latin American debt crises of the ‘eighties
and more recently in the reaction to the Argentine default. The position becomes
much more dangerous when shocks come in rapid succession and contagion effects
build up, so that decisions have to be made with inadequate – probably increasingly
inadequate – information and the normal mechanisms for redistributing or absorbing
losses are overwhelmed. In military terminology, the defences become saturated.
Unfortunately, it is precisely these timing effects which are amongst the most difficult
to model, the more so since they depend importantly on confidence which is itself
notoriously difficult to capture analytically.

10

In the face of these challenges, the prudent central banker, and perhaps even the

prudent academic, might be inclined to say that it all looks very interesting - and then
pass swiftly on. There are, however, some powerful reasons for trying to do better
than that. In the UK we have not experienced a serious financial crisis for a long
time. But other countries, and not just emerging markets, have: one only needs to
look to Scandinavia and Japan for recent examples. And the costs in terms of
foregone GDP can be large, certainly as large as those arising from macroeconomic
under-performance in a more conventional sense – although they tend to come in big
but infrequent dollops and for that reason are easily forgotten or underestimated.
Quantifying the losses is difficult but estimates in the Bank suggest that 25% of GDP

5
would not be unreasonable as a typical order of magnitude. Understanding how
public policy might contribute to the avoidance of such costs therefore seems a
worthwhile objective.

11

At a more day-to-day level, too, it would be helpful to have, for example, a

better way of assessing how high-level regulatory changes are likely to affect the
overall robustness of the financial system, partly so as to inform a cost/benefit
analysis of such measures and partly as a guide in ranking different policy options.
And again, a better model of institutional interactions in the financial sector would
help in understanding how the risks associated with individual firms relate to the
overall stability of the system. For all these and other reasons, the Bank has devoted
significant resources over recent years to the goal of developing models of the
financial sector which might improve our analysis of its stability.

Categories of models

12

Dividing up models of financial stability into a set of hard-and-fast categories

is probably rather artificial; there are no hard boundaries. Models based on one
approach can be expanded or modified to incorporate elements of other approaches;
and certainly models based on different approaches can usefully complement one
another. For convenience, however, I will say a few words about these models under
three headings, which I have labelled: augmented macro-economic models; dynamic
stochastic general equilibrium models based on micro optimising behaviour; and
network models. [Slide 1.]

Augmented macro models

13

Augmented macro models take the outputs of a “conventional” macro model,

the kind we are all familiar with, and feed them into a set of relationships which aim
to capture the impact on key financial variables. There may then be further links in
the chain so that changes in these financial variables can be traced through to impacts
on, say, the balance sheets of financial intermediaries. A key feature is that, rather
than looking at point estimates of the variables concerned, they are treated as
stochastic. Any estimated macro-model will generate stochastic values for certain

6
“output” variables, which can in turn be used to generate probability distributions for
the second and any subsequent tiers of financial variables. And in principle it is
clearly possible to incorporate further stochastic elements by making the intermediate
relationships themselves stochastic although, for the time being at least, the Bank’s
approach is to treat the intermediate relationships as deterministic. The net result, in
any event, is to yield a probability distribution for the value of some “target” variable,
such as the profits or capital of the banking system.

14

To make this a little more concrete, if we were looking, for example, at the

modelling of a shock to banks’ corporate exposures, the process would start with
variables such as GDP growth, short and long-term interest rates, inflation,
unemployment and exchange rates as they are emerge from a macro-model and might
then derive measures of the impact on corporate income, interest payments and
collateral values. From these variables in turn a measure of the corporate default rate
might be calculated, based on an historic reduced-form relationship between the
“driver” variables and defaults. And from that the balance sheet impact can be
determined by bringing in an estimate of loss-given-default. [Slide 2.]

15

Typically such models will be used to explore departures from a base case and

therefore to estimate the impact of a particular scenario on some “significant”
financial variables. Ideally, one of these variables would be a measure of financial
stability. As I noted earlier, however, there is no fully satisfactory metric of this
kind, certainly in terms of overall welfare loss, but some variables may be useful
stand-ins – and at present in the Bank we have adopted the net worth of the major
UK-based banks as a helpful summary variable.

16

The augmented macro-model approach has the merits of being relatively simple

and of relating closely to accessible data. But it also has some significant
weaknesses. First, it is essentially a reduced form rather than a structural approach; it
is not rooted very obviously in behavioural relationships. Second, it typically makes
no explicit provision for responses to financial stress by either companies or
households as borrowers, or banks as lenders. Third, it does not capture the internal
structure of, or interactions within, the financial sector, which arguably lie at the
centre of any analysis of financial crises. For the same reason it has little or nothing

7
to say about contagion or crisis dynamics. Despite these weaknesses, the augmented
macro-model approach has proved to be of considerable value as a basis for a variety
of practical approaches to measuring and managing risk. It has been used, in
particular, in the context of stress testing where it provides a way of constructing
economically consistent scenarios and estimating their implications for the financial
sector – or typically, but more narrowly, the banking sector.

17

The design and application of stress tests is an issue in itself which I am not

going to pursue here. For firms, their use is now widely recognised as a valuable,
indeed essential, complement to other more backward-looking techniques of risk
analysis and management. Let me make just two points. First, the IMF now
regularly include stress testing in their Financial Sector Assessment Programs
(FSAPs) for individual countries, as a way of assessing the overall robustness of a
country’s banking sector. Many of the techniques were pioneered in the UK FSAP
conducted in 2002. Second, stress tests derived from augmented macro-models are a
key element in the more quantified approach to risk assessments which the Bank is
now adopting in its Financial Stability Report. Although the margins of uncertainty
are large, in terms both of the probability that a particular scenario develops and the
impact if it does, this nevertheless represents a useful practical step towards the goal
of setting financial stability analysis in a more rigorous quantified framework.

Dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models

18

As I have noted, a shortcoming of the augmented macro-model approach is

that the financial implications appear as a “reduced form” add-on without clear
behavioural underpinning and without much in the way of feedback to behaviour
either in the financial sector or in other parts of the economy. Moreover, the lack of
any internal structure in the financial system - to the extent that they figure at all,
financial intermediaries are effectively regarded either as identical or as consolidated
into a single entity - means that these models are incapable of capturing some of the
most important characteristics of financial instability.

19

A good deal of work has been undertaken recently in an effort to remedy these

defects. I am not going to attempt a proper review, but simply pick out as a good

8
example the papers produced by Dimitrios Tsomocos in conjunction with
Charles Goodhart and a number of other collaborators. Under the catchy label of
dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models, this work aims to set the exploration
of financial stability in a rigorous general equilibrium framework incorporating some
important structural features of real world economies and financial systems and
optimising behaviour at the level of individual economic agents. In particular the
models incorporate:

(i)

the possibility of default, which as an example of discontinuous behaviour
presents a technical challenge;

(ii)

incomplete markets, which means that not all risks can be hedged (and which
in turn, as a market failure ie something which private markets do not
internalise, provides part of the rationale for financial regulation); and

(iii)

perhaps most important, incorporates a non-trivial degree of internal structure
in the financial system and allows for heterogeneous financial intermediaries,
which then allows for behavioural interaction between those intermediaries.

20

The price which has to be paid for the introduction of this degree of micro-

structure is that the models become very complicated and potentially intractable both
in terms of estimation and in terms of simulating real-world scenarios. Where the
balance is struck along the complexity/faithful-to-reality spectrum is as always a
matter of judgment. And indeed for different purposes it may make sense to strike the
balance in different places.

21

A recent attempt to operationalise these models has, however, been made by

Aspachs, Goodhart, Tsomocos et al (2006). They argue that, ultimately, the effects
of shocks on system stability can be represented by two factors – banking profitability
and the probability of default. Accordingly, an index embodying these two factors
could serve as a useful indicator of financial fragility. In their empirical work, they
find that both profitability and probability of default must deteriorate beyond some
threshold value before there is an impact on economic welfare. [Slide 3] indicates
what such a measure for the UK might look like. Higher values for the index point to

9
financial instability. The measure suggests that the UK financial system has been
stable for much of the past decade, with notable blips before that in the early 1990s
(during the so-called “small banks crisis”) and then in early 2000 (broadly
contemporaneous with the dot.com bubble).

Network models

22

A third and, at least in my view, promising approach – for reasons I will spell

out in a moment – is what I have called “network” models. These also seek to import
some internal structure into the financial sector but they typically do it in a stylised
way rather than through the micro-modelling of behaviour. In essence, they represent
the financial sector – probably best thought of as the banking sector – as a set of nodes
interlinked by a network of counterparty exposures. Each node (bank) is endowed
with a certain amount of capital and has a very simple balance sheet comprising, say,
holdings of some “outside” asset (bank loans) and interbank claims, and liabilities
(deposits) to non-financial agents as well as other banks. The model can be
elaborated to include additional features, for example a tradeable asset whose price is
determined by (flow) supply and demand. In addition, rules are needed to specify
what happens at each node in response to changes in the balance sheet, and in
particular what happens if the net worth of a bank falls to zero, or becomes negative.

23

In most cases, such models do not allow “closed solutions” – or the

assumptions which are needed to permit closed solutions are so restrictive as to
undermine the value of the model. But they can be used for numerical simulations.
Moreover, they allow a good deal of freedom in exploring the effects of different
reaction rules and patterns of interconnection; and although they are difficult to
parameterise in a way which captures any real world financial system, they may have
useful insights to offer on the way in which structural features – the distribution of
bank sizes, the number of counterparties a bank has, and so on – affect the way in
which shocks are transmitted or amplified. Furthermore, and the reason I say they
seem particularly interesting, discontinuities (for example bankruptcy) and other
frictions (for example the impact of “fire sales” on asset values) at the level of the
individual bank generate in a very natural way non-linear dynamics for the system as
a whole - which is exactly what experience suggests does happen in financial systems

10
under serious stress. [Slide 4.] This sort of chaos theory approach seems worth
pursuing further as an additional route into the analysis of financial stability.

24

Network models suggest that financial systems may be, at the same time,

“robust yet fragile”. Whilst greater connectivity amongst the nodes makes for wider
distribution of risks and lowers the initial probability of individual default, the impact
– should a crisis develop – could be significantly increased. Greater
interconnectedness means that an institution which survives the impact effects of a
shock is likely to be exposed to a greater number of defaulting counterparties in the
second round. Such models also suggest that shocks which are indistinguishable a
priori can have significantly different consequences. A system may experience 1000
shocks of roughly comparable size and remain resilient. But the 1001st shock, if it
impacts on a particular structural weakness or pressure point, could have a
dramatically different effect. As in so many other areas of financial analysis, the past
may not be a good guide to the future!

The future

25

This brief review of alternative approaches to the quantification of systemic

risk indicates that many issues remain to be explored. Certainly in the Bank we
envisage a program of further work extending well into the future. The objective will
be to develop an integrated framework within which to set the Bank’s macroprudential analysis and commentary. As with the more familiar models applied in the
monetary area, such a framework for looking at systemic risk should help to ensure
consistency in policy judgements and give us a better way of ranking what can
otherwise become simply a “laundry list” of disparate risks.

26

The approach being developed in the Bank by my colleagues Andy Haldane,

Prasanna Gai, Mathias Drehmann and others will aim to bring together structural
models of credit and interest rate risk, to take into account also the amplification
effects associated with liquidity risk on both the asset side and liability sides of banks’
balance sheets and then integrate all this with a network model of interbank linkages
so generating forward-looking aggregate loss distributions for the UK banking sector.
In that sense it represents a fusion of the three approaches I have discussed.

11
[Slide 5.] But some parts of this programme, notably the modelling of liquidity risk,
are very much in their infancy. The latter needs to reflect the intuition that “fire sales”
by a firm in difficulty can push prices below fundamental value, to a degree which
reflects the liquidity or otherwise of a financial market, and at the same time represent
the time profile of prices following distressed sales. It will also be important to
capture interactions between the asset and liability sides of the balance sheet. The
non-linearities which these interactions generate will almost certainly fatten the tails
on the distributions of system-wide losses by even more than implied by pure network
effects. The cliff faces in my chart will be steeper, with the implication that the
potential violence of crises is greater. To the extent that these loss distributions
capture feedback and amplification effects as well as network interactions they might,
however, begin to provide rough approximations to the welfare cost of financial
instability.

27

The Bank is not alone amongst central banks in seeking to develop systemic

risk models but its approach differs in a number of important respects. First, it
explicitly recognises interest rate risk as well as credit risk in banks’ balance sheets.
Second, a more rigorous, macro credit risk model is used to characterise shocks,
allowing policy makers to explore specific scenarios as well as stochastic simulations.
And third, as I have noted, the approach aims to capture internal frictions in the
financial sector as reflected in liquidity effects. In addition, and in parallel with the
assembly of individual components, it also aims to incorporate, as a form of crosscheck, asset valuations derived from financial market prices using Merton-type
techniques.

28

An integrated “suite” of models of this kind, while it represents a considerable

advance on the starting point, nevertheless leaves some important issues unresolved.
Perhaps most important, the “true” costs associated with systemic risk – as I noted
before, the additional costs beyond those which would arise anyway in the face of
some external shock – need to be isolated and fed back in a consistent way into the
macroeconomy. Only then will it be possible to calibrate systemic risk properly in
terms of the impact on GDP. This is the province of the second group of models I
referred to earlier. A second challenge is that episodes of severe stress are quite rare.
Quantifying and calibrating the interactions in these circumstances between balance

12
sheets, asset prices and other variables is therefore difficult, although there may be
useful insights from recent work on search costs relating to, for example, the pricing
of corporate bonds. And third, there are, more generally, significant shortcomings in
the data relevant to systemic risk analysis. Specifically, balance sheet data is often
hard to come by, particularly for LCFIs, and is often out of date. The Merton
approach helps to avoid these problems by using more timely market information; but
it has important limitations, notably its assumption of normal distributions. In
addition, our map of interlinkages in the financial sector is derived mainly from
banks’ large exposures data, which gives at best an incomplete picture especially
when risk transfer has significantly widened the range of relevant institutions.

Conclusions

29

This has been a very rapid tour of some rather difficult territory but I hope it

has given a flavour of one aspect of the Bank’s financial stability work. It is certainly
at the theoretical end of the spectrum but the motives, as I indicated at the beginning,
are severely practical.

30

It would therefore be reasonable to ask how much practical impact the analysis

to date has had. Those of you who are regular readers of the Bank’s Financial
Stability Report will have noticed a significant change of style and approach in the
edition published in mid-2006. That included, for the first time, a partly qualitative,
partly quantitative indication of the probabilities and potential impact of various kinds
of shock. We will be updating that analysis in the next edition due to be published in
a month’s time. Even the enthusiasts would not claim great precision for the numbers
and in any case, to borrow some vocabulary from mechanics, they are probably as
much measures of stresses as of strains.

31

But looking further ahead, a framework does now seem to be emerging within

which a more systematic discussion of financial risks can take place. In time – as we
saw with macro-economic models – better quantification should be possible. But
don’t hold your breath. Alongside all of the hurdles I have mentioned there is one
further difficulty – namely that the structure of the financial sector is changing and

13
arguably changing faster than that of any other sector in the economy. A substantial
element of judgment, experience and plain hunch is, I am afraid, likely to remain in
the business of handling financial crises.

32

A final point. Much of what I have talked about this evening has been the

work of a group in the Bank headed by Andy Haldane with Prasanna Gai and
Mathias Drehmann. I would like to thank all three of them for keeping me, I hope,
more or less on the right track in these remarks.

ENDS

