Asset prices, saving and the wider effects of monetary policy
Speech given by
David Miles, External Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England

At the pro.Manchester Business Conference
1 March 2012

I would like to thank Becky Maule and Arpad Morotz for research assistance, and others for helpful
comments. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the
Bank of England or other members of the Monetary Policy Committee.

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

Last month, the MPC voted to loosen monetary policy by expanding the size of its programme of asset
purchases by £50bn to a total of £325bn. This comes after a period of three years during which Bank Rate
has remained close to its lower limit of zero. This is unprecedented. The extraordinarily low level of Bank
Rate and scale of the asset purchases – which at £325 billion will be the equivalent of about £12,500 for
every household in the UK – is a reflection of the recessionary forces that were unleashed by the near
collapse of the financial system in 2008 and whose effects are still being felt today.

Today I want to describe how I see the current stance of monetary policy, consider how asset purchases
might be affecting the economy, and assess the view that such asset purchases are causing particular harm
to those saving for retirement.

Monetary policy

At the February meeting of the MPC there were differing views on the right scale of the expansion of asset
purchases. (I voted for a larger stock of assets than the majority). But the decision to make monetary policy
more expansionary was unanimous. That decision reflected the aim of monetary policy – to meet an inflation
target – and judgements about where inflationary pressures are likely to be over the next few years, the time
over which changes in monetary policy today have their effect. CPI inflation has decreased sharply over the
past few months: since its recent peak of 5.2% in September, inflation in January had dropped to 3.6% so
had fallen back halfway towards the 2% target. And inflation is likely to continue to fall as domestically
generated price pressures are restrained by downward pressure from unemployment and spare capacity,
and the contribution of past energy and import price rises diminishes. In the light of our projections for
inflation and growth, outlined in the February Inflation Report, the Committee all agreed that without further
monetary stimulus it was more likely than not that inflation would undershoot the 2% target in the medium
term. With the extra stimulus provided by continued asset purchases, the MPC’s latest projections imply that
the risks around the inflation outlook, relative to the target, are broadly balanced by the end of the forecast
period (Chart 1). The probability that inflation will be above 2% (the area in the chart above the horizontal
line) is only marginally smaller than the chances that it is below 2% by 2015.

These inflation projections – which reflect an assessment of the balance between demand in the UK and the
supply capacity of the economy – are absolutely central to monetary policy. Any such projection of how
inflation might evolve must be based on some assumption of how monetary policy evolves. The projection
shown in the so-called fan chart (Chart 1) is conditioned on a particular assumption about future policy – that
Bank Rate follows a path in line with market yields and that the stock of assets purchased remains at the
current level. This is an assumption made for the purposes of generating a forecast, a forecast that is
conditional on a particular setting of monetary policy. The assumption on Bank Rate and the stock of asset
purchases is, to use a bit of economics jargon, a conditioning path; it is NOT a forecast that the MPC makes
of what its own future policy will be.

2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

2

Chart 1: February 2012 CPI inflation projection based on market interest rate expectations and £325
billion asset purchases

Source: Bank of England, Inflation Report, February 2012

The fan chart shown here is based on the assumption that Bank Rate follows a path that is consistent with
the pattern of market interest rates of different maturities at the time of the Report (early February). That
pattern of market rates implied that the first increase in Bank Rate might not come until the second half of
2014. It is the policy combination of a stock of asset purchases of £325 billion and a path for Bank Rate that
is pretty much unchanged until the second half of 2014 that generates the probability assessments about
future inflation that are shown in the fan chart.

Different assumptions about monetary policy could deliver an inflation projection with the risks around the
inflation outlook, relative to the target, broadly balanced by the end of the forecast period. For example, it is
possible that a path for policy that was looser in the near term (more asset purchases) but was then
tightened at an earlier point (a rise in Bank Rate sooner than the second half of 2014) would result in a
similar outturn for inflation as in the fan chart. And it might be the case that a path such as that could be a
better one for the economy. Aggressively loosening monetary policy now might bring us closer to the point
at which Bank Rate could be moved back towards a more normal level – and Bank Rate is certainly NOT at
a normal level today. This is an argument that influences the way I see monetary policy today.

At the moment, with Bank Rate judged to have effectively reached its floor, monetary policy is being
loosened through the purchase of assets, and those assets are government bonds (gilts). The objective of
asset purchases is the same as for a cut in Bank Rate: to stimulate demand for goods and services and to
prevent demand falling so much behind supply that inflation would fall below target and stay below it. I

3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

3

sense that there is more agreement by people outside the Bank of England with the policy of making
monetary policy very expansionary than with the means by which it is being pursued – which is through
buying gilts. Two particular criticisms are made about the strategy of buying gilts: that it is ineffective as a
means to boosting demand; and that it is having adverse side effects, particularly on people saving for
retirement. Both those criticisms are worth considering carefully.

The impact of asset purchases on demand

There are 2 main channels through which I believe asset purchases boost demand (Figure 1). First, when
assets (and today that means gilts) are purchased from the non-bank private sector, it is likely that the sellers
of gilts will rebalance their portfolios, as the bank deposits they receive in return are unlikely to be very close
substitutes for the assets sold. That portfolio rebalancing is likely to result in an increase in the demand for,
and price of, other long-dated risky assets, like corporate bonds and equities. Those assets are likely to be
closer substitutes for gilts sold than is cash (bank deposits); in terms of maturity and yield they are more
gilt-like. The rise in asset prices and decline in yields on these other assets may make it easier for many
companies to raise funds, easing credit conditions. They will generate capital gains for households who are
the ultimate owners of those risky assets, boosting their wealth. If households consume part of that
increased wealth, or companies invest some of the extra funding raised on capital markets, demand (and
GDP) will be higher. This is the portfolio rebalancing channel of asset purchases.

There is another way in which purchases work, particularly at times of stress in bank funding markets. The
money received by non-banks for the assets purchased by the Bank of England is initially deposited at
banks. Those extra funds might make banks more willing to expand lending. The extent to which they do so
will depend on the form in which the money flows into banks – the more secure and long term the funding the
more likely it will be to encourage banks to lend. Some of the funds that ultimately flow to banks as a result
of asset purchases by the Bank of England might be in the form of term funding (e.g. as a result of banks
issuing bonds), and that is more likely to facilitate bank lending than very short term money market flows.
Easing in bank lending conditions boosts demand, particularly for those entirely dependent on banks for
credit, for example small companies.

It is difficult to quantify precisely the strength of these effects of asset purchases. My own view is that the
portfolio balance channel – the first one – is the more consistent and reliable mechanism. The bank lending
channel might be weak when banks are looking to de-lever, even though the flow of funds that asset
purchases generate is particularly helpful when bank funding costs are high. A variety of studies carried out
at several institutions have concluded that asset purchases increase demand and GDP.1 Economists at the
Bank of England have used a variety of empirical methods to estimate the effect of the first tranche of

1

For example, see Chung, H, Laforte, J P, Reifschneider, D and Williams, J (2011), ‘Have we underestimated the likelihood and
severity of zero lower bound events?’, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper no. 2011-01 and Lenza, M, Pill, H and
Reichlin, L (2010), ‘Monetary policy in exceptional times’, Economic Policy, Vol. 25, pages 295–339.
4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

4

£200bn of asset purchases in 2009-10. The results suggested that those asset purchases boosted GDP by
about 1.5% to 2%.2

Figure 1: Key channels for the impact of the Bank of England’s gilt purchases on domestic demand
Portfolio substitution
channel (always operates)

Gilt yields 

Bank of
England gilt
purchases

Term premia 
Yields on long‐dated
risky assets 

Cost of accessing
credit in financial
markets

Bank deposits and liquid
assets

Wealth 

Domestic
demand

Credit risk
premia 

Availability of
bank credit

Bank funding channel (may operate in
conditions of stressed bank funding)

The effects of asset purchases on gilt yields

As the figure above shows, one way in which the Bank’s asset purchases affect the real economy is through
their effect on gilt yields. A decrease in gilt yields is only one part of the transmission mechanism, and it is
certainly not the ultimate goal of the asset purchases. Movements in the yields on other, risky, assets are
probably more important as the means by which asset purchases boost demand than are movements in gilt
yields per se. Changes in the yields on any risky asset can, of course, be split up into a component equal to
the change in gilt yields and a component equal to a change in the spread between the yields on the risky
asset and gilts. So asset purchases by the central bank might have their main impact upon the prices (or
yields) on risky assets via the impact on the spread over government bond yields rather than through shifting
government bond yields. That is one reason why I think there is rather too much attention paid to the
question of the impact of the Bank’s asset purchases on gilt yields.

Chart 2 shows what happened to the spread between yields on sterling corporate bonds and gilt yields over
the past 5 years. During the course of 2009, when the Bank bought close to £200 billion of gilts, the spread
between yields on corporate bonds and gilts fell by between 2000 basis points (for high yield bonds) and
200 basis points (for investment-grade, non-financial corporate bonds). Those shifts in spreads were far
greater than the shift in gilt yields. Part of that large fall in spreads on corporate bonds reflects factors
besides the Bank of England purchases of gilts. The Bank was also buying some corporate bonds. And
2

See Joyce, M, Tong, M and Woods, R (2011), ‘The United Kingdom’s quantitative easing policy: design, operation and impact’, Bank
of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 51, No. 3, pages 200–12.
5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

5

other central banks were also buying assets. But the Bank’s gilt purchases were the dominant force
reducing the stock of sterling fixed income assets held by the private sector.3 I believe that created more
demand for sterling fixed income funding that was needed by companies. The issuance of sterling bonds by
the non-bank private sector was unusually large in 2009. I believe that it was through its impact on corporate
bond yields and issuance that much of the impact of the Bank’s asset purchases made then came through.

Chart 2: Sterling corporate bond spreads for financials, non-financials and high yield(a)

Basis points
3500

Financials (rhs)

Basis points
1200

Non‐financials (rhs)

3000

1000

High yield (lhs)
2500

800

2000
600
1500
400

1000

200

500
0
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

0

Sources: Bank of America/Merrill Lynch and Bloomberg.
(a) Spreads of corporate bond yields over reference gilt yields.

Yields on the conventional gilts that the Bank has been buying have also fallen sharply since asset
purchases began in early 2009 (Chart 3). I should note that this is not because the stock of gilts held outside
the Bank of England has fallen sharply. In fact the stock of gilts held outside the Bank of England has
increased since asset purchases began in March of 2009. Today the Bank is buying conventional gilts with
maturities in excess of 3 years. In March of 2009 the market value of conventional gilts with maturity above
3 years held outside the UK public sector was around £380bn – about 27% of GDP. Today it is around
£485 billion, or 32% of GDP.

3

This was offset by new issuance to fund the fiscal deficit.
6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

6

Chart 3: Nominal yield curves of UK conventional gilts
6
15‐Feb‐12

16‐Feb‐09

15‐Feb‐07

Yield (per cent)

5
4
3
2
1
0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

Maturity (years)
Sources: Bloomberg, Bank of England calculations.

But relative to a counterfactual in which the Bank did not purchase any government bonds, demand for them
has been higher and yields lower. Research carried out at the Bank suggests that the first round of asset
purchases might have decreased gilt yields by around 100 basis points. That 100 bp figure needs to be
seen in the light of the very much larger declines in corporate bond yields – the dramatic decline in spreads
shown in Chart 2 means that corporate bond yields fell far faster than the fall in gilt yields. The fall in gilt
yields since asset purchases began also needs to be seen in the light of the overall decline in gilt yields
since before the financial crisis began. In early 2007, 10-year gilt yields were a bit under 5%; by early 2009
yields were around 3½%; today 10-year yields are a bit over 2%. Based on the Bank economists’ estimate
of the impact of asset purchases, perhaps around half of the 250 basis points fall in 10-year gilt yields has
been due to the MPC’s actions on gilt purchases. Some of the fall will have reflected an expectation that
Bank Rate will be kept at a lower level for the next ten years than seemed likely in 2007.

But I think there are other factors at work besides UK monetary policy that have driven gilt yields down. It is
worth noting that the yields on index-linked gilts have declined to exceptionally low (indeed unprecedented)
levels. Chart 5 below shows that the (real) yields to maturity on inflation-proof debt issued by the UK
government are now negative or close to zero for bonds with maturities that stretch out to 50 years. The
Bank of England in its asset purchase operations has not bought any of these bonds.

7

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

7

Chart 4: Stocks of all conventional and index-linked gilt holdings by sector, excluding central
government(a)
£ billions
1400

Other (households, local authorities, public corporates, PNFCs)
Insurance corporations and pension funds

1200

Other financial institutions
Non-residents

1000

UK monetary financial institutions, excluding Bank of England
Bank of England

800

600

400

200

0
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Sources: ONS and Bank of England.
(a) Market values. All maturities. Total excludes central government holdings.

I think focusing on gilt yields risks both exaggerating and simultaneously understating the impact of the
central bank’s asset purchases. It understates the impact because I think more of the effect of asset
purchases works through changing the demand for other risky assets and that shows up in rather big shifts in
their yield spreads over gilts; it exaggerates the impact of asset purchases because other factors have
certainly been at work in driving the yield on UK government bonds lower.

And I believe that the criticism that gilt purchases are doing great harm for those saving for retirement also
risks making a rather similar error. It seems to me likely that the very low level of real yields is related in
large part to ‘safe haven’ asset flows. In the wake of the financial crisis, and with ongoing concerns about
the indebtedness of some countries, it is likely that people’s perceptions about the probability of extreme,
bad events, and possibly also their willingness to take risk, have changed. As the probability people attach
to bad events goes up, it is likely that their demand for assets that are perceived to be ‘safe’ increases, and
so the yields on those assets decrease.

It does not take particularly large changes in those probabilities to have sizable impacts on the real rate of
return on ‘safe’ bonds. For example, research I carried out a few years ago suggested that if an extreme
(bad) event was expected every 100 years, rather than every 133 years, the real rate of return on safe bonds

8

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

8

could fall from about 3.7% to 2.3% (Table 1).4 If an extreme and bad event thought likely to occur once every
200 years became seen as much more likely, so it happened once every 80 years, the real yields on safe
government bonds might fall by about 400 bps. Such falls are larger than the decline in yields on most
indexed gilts since the start of the financial crisis.

Chart 5: UK spot real yield curves of index-linked gilts

3
15‐Feb‐12

16‐Feb‐09

15‐Feb‐07

Yield (per cent)

2
1
0
‐1
‐2
‐3
0

5

10

15

20
25
30
Maturity (years)

35

40

45

Sources: Bloomberg, Bank of England calculations.

Table 1: The impact of changes in the probability of extreme, bad events(a)
Real rate of return on
'Safe' bonds
Equity
Risk premium
Once every n
Probability (%)
years
0.10
0.40
0.75
1.00
1.25

n=1000
n=250
n=133
n=100
n=80

7.29
5.60
3.67
2.33
1.00

8.94
8.31
7.59
7.07
6.56

1.65
2.71
3.91
4.74
5.56

Source: Morgan Stanley Research (2005).
(a) The bad event in question here is one which if it happens reduces GDP by 38%.

4

See Miles, D, Pillonca, V and Baker, M (2005), ‘What should equities and bonds be worth in a risky world?’, Morgan Stanley Research.
The bad event in question here is one which if it happens reduces GDP by 38%. Such an event might seem too extreme to be
interesting. But UK GDP is now close to 15% below where one might have expected it to be had output grown at the long run average
since the start of 2008. The shock to the GDP of some of the countries in Europe is larger again.
9

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

9

It may also be that people have become more risk averse over the recent past. And relatively small changes
in investors’ risk aversion can also have significant effects: an increase in risk aversion will decrease the real
rate of return on ‘safe’ bonds quite substantially.

So it is likely that the perception of UK government bonds as safe assets, alongside a shift in people’s desire
to hold safe assets, has played a role in the fall in gilt yields in addition to the effects of the Bank’s asset
purchases.

The effects of asset purchases on those approaching retirement

Clearly falls in gilt yields have an impact on the returns that investors receive. Part of the reduction in
nominal gilt yields reflects asset purchases – though as I have noted much of it reflects other factors. People
have raised legitimate concerns about the impact of the Bank’s asset purchases on those approaching
retirement. That is understandable. Annuity rates have fallen by around 100 bps since asset purchases
started in March 2009, and by around 150 bps from their recent peaks in 2008. A couple with a pension pot
of £100,000 could have received an annual pension of around £6200 around three years ago, but would now
get around £5200.5 Focusing just on the price of annuities it would seem that those close to retirement have
seen the value of their pension saving fall by around 17%.

But it cannot be right to assess the impact of monetary policy upon the retirement resources of people by just
focusing on what has happened to gilt yields and noting the impact on annuity rates. The impact of asset
purchases (or more generally of monetary policy) must depend not just on what it does to gilt yields and
annuity prices but also what it does to the value of the retirement savings of those about to buy annuities. If
they hold government bonds then the capital gain on those bonds from lower gilt yields offsets the impact of
the induced change in annuity rates. If they hold other assets – equities, residential property, land, corporate
bonds – then the impact of monetary policy on those asset values needs to be factored in. An increase of
about 19% in the value of a pension pot would provide the same yearly income as expected in March 2009
at current annuity rates. If monetary policy generates rises in other asset prices (besides gilts) it can offset
some, or all – or more than all – of the effects of rising annuity prices. And the impact of monetary policy on
the real economy – on GDP and on unemployment – will affect welfare too. Even someone about to leave
the labour force will not be unaffected by changes in unemployment which affect the incomes of children,
grandchildren, nephews and nieces.

It is worth considering this in more detail and in doing so to look at the portfolios of company pension
schemes. Those portfolios will not be exactly the same as those of savers with personal pensions. And
shifts in gilt yields will impact company schemes (and affect deficits and so company required contribution
rates) rather than the pensions about to be received by newly retired employees. But the factor I want to
5

Based on a £100,000 annuity for a male aged 65 and a female aged 60, on a joint life, two thirds, guaranteed 5 years and level
payments basis. Source: William Burrows.
10

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

10

focus on here is how monetary policy might have affected the balance between the value of the type of
assets held by long-term savers and the cost of buying annuities; that will affect both company schemes and
those owning personal pensions.
Chart 6 below shows aggregate portfolios of company schemes as measured in the Purple Book;6 this
focuses on assets held in pension schemes with defined benefit liabilities.

Chart 6: Composition of defined benefit company pension funds’ assets in 2011(a)

Equities
4.4%

8.7%

4.1%
1.6%
41.1%
14.5%

Conventional government bonds
(non index‐linked)
Corporate fixed interest
securities
Index‐linked securities
Insurance policies
Cash and deposits

17.8%

Property
7.9%

Other investments

Source: Pension Protection Fund / Pensions Regulator.
(a) Data from the Purple Book (a joint publication of the Pension Protection Fund and the Pensions Regulator). It focuses
on defined benefit schemes, predominantly in the private sector. In 2011 it covers assets of approximately £970bn,
which is approximately 75% of pension funds’ total assets, based on 2010 ONS data.

Chart 7 shows how portfolio shares of these pension schemes have evolved since 2008. It appears that the
proportion of assets that pension funds hold in nominal (conventional) government bonds has decreased
over the past few years, while the share of corporate bonds has increased. That is consistent with the
operation of the portfolio rebalancing channel of the Bank’s asset purchases outlined earlier, though it
probably also reflects trends that pre-date those asset purchases.

6

Pension Protection Fund and The Pensions Regulator (2011), ‘The Purple Book: DB Pensions Universe Risk Profile.’ Available at
http://www.pensionprotectionfund.org.uk/Pages/ThePurpleBook.aspx.
11

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

11

Chart 7: Changes in the composition of defined benefit company pension funds’ assets

Equities

100%
90%

Other investments

80%
70%

Property

60%

Cash and deposits

50%
40%

Insurance policies

30%

Index‐linked securities

20%
10%
0%
2008

2009

2010

2011

Corporate fixed interest
securities
Conventional government
bonds (non index‐linked)

Source: Pension Protection Fund / Pensions Regulator, Bank of England calculations.
(a) Data from the Purple Book (a joint publication of the Pension Protection Fund and the Pensions Regulator). It focuses
on defined benefit schemes, predominantly in the private sector. In 2011 it covers assets of approximately £970bn,
which is approximately 75% of pension funds’ total assets, based on 2010 ONS data.

The Purple Book data suggest that a bit above 40% of the portfolio of assets of pension funds is in equities.
Chart 8 below shows what has happened to the price of UK equities since the start of 2007. The low point in
equity prices coincides with the start of asset purchases by the Bank of England. Since the couple of weeks
preceding that date (5 March 2009) the UK stock market has risen by about 50%. Corporate fixed income
securities make up over 15% of the assets of the pension funds covered in the Purple Book. Since the
run-up to the March 2009 announcement of asset purchases the yields on such bonds (to which prices are
inversely related) have fallen sharply: by 240 bps on non-financial investment-grade bonds and by almost
2000 basis points on their high-yield counterparts.

Thus close to 60% of the assets held by company pension schemes have seen very large increases in value
in the period since asset purchases began. That rise in values continued over the shorter period since asset
purchases were resumed in October of last year. Since then the FTSE all share equity price index has risen
by about 15%; yields on investment-grade sterling corporate bonds have fallen by about 25 bps and on
high-yield bonds by about 85 bps.

It is impossible to know what would have happened to equity prices and to the value of corporate bonds in
the absence of the Bank’s asset purchases. If there was no plausible mechanism linking the two I would be
sceptical about drawing any conclusion. But I believe there is a compelling economic argument linking very

12

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

12

large scale purchases of gilts by the central bank to a knock on impact boosting the demand for substitute
assets like corporate bonds and equities.

Chart 8: UK equity prices(a)

7000
6500
6000
5500
5000
4500
4000
3500
3000
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Source: Thomson Reuters Datastream.
(a) FTSE 100.

I think it is implausible to see the increase in equity and corporate bond prices in the UK over the past few
months as unrelated to the policy actions of the Bank of England and other central banks. And those
increases in asset values will have boosted the assets of pension funds, and of other savers, relative to a
situation without asset purchases.

Nonetheless it is inevitable that there are some people that have been made worse off by the direct impact of
the Bank’s asset purchases on gilt yields, and that have not benefitted much from the effects on the prices of
other assets. Those people are amongst the losers from very low gilt yields. It will not be any comfort for
people in this position to be told that any monetary policy action will have some distributional impacts. But if
monetary policy actions could be vetoed so long as someone was made worse off then there could be no
monetary policy.

The ultimate objective of the asset purchases is to boost nominal demand in order to prevent there being
such slack in the economy that inflation stays below target. In the absence of the Bank’s asset purchases I
am sure that investment and consumer spending would have been significantly weaker than they have been.
Many more people would have been much worse off. Unemployment would have been even higher than it

13

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

13

currently is. Many of those who would have found themselves without a job are the children or grandchildren
of someone nearing retirement.

Conclusion

Focusing on the impact of the Bank of England’s asset purchases on the yields of conventional gilts is
understandable because those are the assets the Bank is buying. But it is a mistake to see the impact on gilt
yields as a sufficient measure of the economic impact of policy. It is also a mistake to think that because
asset purchases reduce gilt yields they must reduce the value of pension savings relative to the cost of
securing a retirement income. The main impact of asset purchases should be seen as working through the
effect on the prices of other assets (besides gilts) and on the cost and availability of funds to companies and
households.

14

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

14

