Asset Prices, Financial Imbalances and Monetary Policy: Are
Inflation Targets Enough?
Speech given by
Charles Bean, Chief Economist and Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of
England

New South Wales, Australia
19 August 2003

I am grateful to Peter Andrews, Francesco Giavazzi, Ed Nelson, Ignazio Visco and Sushil Wadhwani and
participants of the conference on “Monetary Stability, Financial Stability and the Business Cycle” at the Bank
for International Settlements, Basel, 28-29 March 2003 for useful comments. The views expressed are those
of the author and do not reflect those of either the Bank of England or the Monetary Policy Committee.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Abstract
Some commentators have argued that an exclusive focus of monetary policy on
achieving price stability is inappropriate in a world where asset-price misalignments
and financial imbalances are increasingly prevalent. This paper reviews the argument
that monetary policy should react to asset price movements and/or financial
imbalances over and above their impact on the inflation outlook. I conclude that,
while monetary policy makers should take note of such developments, the
macroeconomic implications can be adequately embraced within an appropriately
flexible and forward-looking concept of inflation targets. In a simple New Keynesian
model, modified to allow for capital and debt accumulation, I then show that the
possibility of credit crunches may affect the design of the optimal policy in subtle and
unexpected ways. I also consider a variety of other ways that incipient financial
imbalances could impinge on the conduct of an optimal monetary policy. Finally I
discuss recent developments in the UK household sector as a practical example of the
problem of assessing whether an asset price is misaligned and whether balance sheet
developments pose a threat to the outlook.
JEL Classification: E52, E58, E44
Key Words: Asset prices, financial imbalances, monetary policy, inflation targets.

1

1

Introduction

On the face of it, the last decade and a half has been a successful period for most
developed-country central banks. Compared to the previous fifteen years inflation has
been low and relatively stable. Moreover, price stability has not been achieved at the
expense of the real economy, as growth has also been relatively stable and
unemployment has been falling in a number of countries.
Notwithstanding the good macroeconomic outturns there has, however, been a
growing concern that the achievement of price stability may be associated with
heightened risks of financial instability, particularly so in the aftermath of the
collapse of the dot-com bubble and the more recent wider correction to share values.
Appreciating asset values and debt accumulation have, in some countries, led to
stretched household and corporate balance sheets that are vulnerable to the sort of
equity price corrections witnessed recently. That has led some commentators to
question the quasi-consensus that monetary policy should be directed exclusively at
maintaining price stability and its role in combating financial instability should be
restricted to minimising any adverse consequences when over-valuations are
corrected or as financial imbalances unwind.
The heterodox view is neatly summarised by Crockett (2003; italics in original):
“(I)n a monetary regime in which the central bank’s operational objective is
expressed exclusively in terms of short-term inflation, there may be
insufficient protection against the build up of financial imbalances that lies at
the root of much of the financial instability we observe. This could be so if the
focus on short-term inflation control meant that the authorities did not tighten
monetary policy sufficiently pre-emptively to lean against excessive credit
expansion and asset price increases. In jargon, if the monetary policy reaction
function does not incorporate financial imbalances, the monetary anchor may
fail to deliver financial stability.”
In this paper I examine the view that inflation targeting alone, whether explicit or
implicit, is not enough and that there is a case for an additional monetary response to
asset price movements and/or developing financial imbalances in order to reduce the
risks of future financial instability. My view, in a nutshell, is that (flexible) inflation
targeting is best thought of as a description of the objective function of the policy
maker rather than entailing an explicit monetary policy reaction function. The abrupt
unwinding of asset price misalignments and/or financial imbalances that may lead to
financial instability will also invariably be associated with significant macroeconomic
instability. A forward-looking flexible inflation targeting central bank should bear in
mind those longer-run consequences of asset price bubbles and financial imbalances
in the setting of current interest rates. Consequently there is no need to require an
additional response of monetary policy, though inflation-targeting central banks may
need to look out further into the future than is customary in order to take on board
these concerns.
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. In the next section, I review some
of the recent literature on the extent to which monetary policy should respond to asset
prices, and in particular to asset price bubbles. While it may well be appropriate for

2

interest rates to respond to asset prices, among many other economic indicators, I
conclude that such a response is consistent with inflation targeting. In the subsequent
section I characterise the optimal monetary policy in a simple New Keynesian
macroeconomic model in which financial imbalances play a role and where their
subsequent unwinding may lead to a credit crunch or similar financial distress. The
possibility of credit crunches turns out to affect the design of the optimal policy in a
subtle, and perhaps surprising, way. I also consider a variety of other ways that
incipient financial imbalances could impinge on the conduct of an optimal monetary
policy. Finally I illustrate some of the difficulties in deciding whether an asset price is
misaligned, or an imbalance poses a potential threat to macroeconomic stability, by
considering the recent evolution of house prices and consumer debt in the United
Kingdom.

2

Asset prices and monetary policy: some recent views

The conventional view that monetary policy can do little more than deal with the fallout from the unwinding of asset price bubbles has been clearly enunciated by
Chairman Greenspan (2002):
“Such data suggest that nothing short of a sharp increase in short-term rates
that engenders a significant economic retrenchment is sufficient to check a
nascent bubble. The notion that a well-timed incremental tightening could
have been calibrated to prevent the late 1990s bubble is almost surely an
illusion. Instead, we…need to focus on policies to mitigate the fallout when it
occurs and, hopefully, ease the transition to the next expansion."
But not everyone subscribes to this view, and there has recently been a lively
literature debating the extent to which monetary policy should respond to asset price
movements (see e.g. Batini and Nelson (2000), Bernanke and Gertler (1999, 2001),
Cecchetti, Genberg, Lipsky and Wadhwani (2000), Cecchetti, Genberg and
Wadhwani (2003), Taylor (2001)). Thus on the one hand Bernanke and Gertler
(1999) conclude that:
“The inflation targeting approach dictates that central banks should adjust
monetary policy actively and pre-emptively to offset incipient inflationary and
deflationary pressures. Importantly for present purposes, it also implies that
policy should not respond to changes in asset prices, except insofar as they
signal changes in expected inflation.”
Against this, Cecchetti, Genberg, Lipsky and Wadhwani argue:
“A central bank concerned with both hitting an inflation target at a given time
horizon, and achieving as smooth a path as possible for inflation, is likely to
achieve superior performance by adjusting its policy instruments not only to
inflation (or its inflation forecast) and the output gap, but to asset prices as
well. Typically modifying the policy framework in this way could also reduce
output volatility. We emphasize that this conclusion is based on our view that
reacting to asset prices in the normal course of policymaking will reduce the
likelihood of asset price bubbles forming, thus reducing the risk of boom-bust
investment cycles.”

3

Each of these contributions evaluate the appropriateness of a policy response to asset
prices by exploring the efficacy of a variety of interest rate reaction functions in
simple calibrated stochastic model economies in which asset prices play some explicit
role. Thus both Bernanke and Gertler (1999, 2001) and Cecchetti et al. (2000)
employ a dynamic New Keynesian model, modified to allow for credit market
frictions and exogenous asset price bubbles. The credit market frictions arise from
agency problems in the credit market, so that internal finance is cheaper than external
finance and the external finance premium depends on the firm’s financial position. In
particular a rise in the firm’s share price increases the available collateral and leads to
a reduction in the marginal cost of external funds, and a consequent increase in
borrowing and investment. Furthermore the equity price may differ from
fundamentals by an exogenous and stochastic bubble component, which grows
exponentially but may collapse. During the build up of such a bubble the external
finance premium falls, and investment, aggregate demand and future potential output
rise, whereas when the bubble collapses the processes reverses.
But despite the apparent similarity of the models employed, the two sets of authors
come to strikingly different conclusions about whether it is wise for the monetary
authorities to condition their short-term interest rate on the equity price. Cecchetti,
Genberg and Wadhwani argue that a key difference lies in different assumptions
about what shocks are present and exactly what the monetary authorities are allowed
to observe.
Similarly, Batini and Nelson explore whether a response to the exchange rate (which
may or may not contain a bubble) is advisable in an open economy setting in which
the real exchange rate influences both demand and supply and the exchange rate is
determined via uncovered interest parity. For an optimised rule they find no gain in
reacting to exchange rate movements. Yet Cecchetti et al., using essentially the same
model, find that under some circumstances responding to the exchange rate does lead
to higher welfare. Again the key difference appears to lie in the assumptions about
what shocks are present and exactly what the monetary authorities know.
Now at one level it is not surprising that different assumptions about the stochastic
structure of the economy and what the authorities can observe/infer may lead to
different conclusions about the advisability of linking interest rates to asset price
movements. And few people would disagree that the authorities should take account
of asset price movements insofar as they affect the outlook for output and inflation.
But the question is whether some additional response is called for, as the above
quotes should make clear. In addressing this issue, it is helpful to look first at the
analytical framework these authors employ.
Essentially all these contributions evaluate whether the addition of asset prices – or an
estimate of the bubble component therein – to a simple feedback rule for the policy
rate instrument leads to a lower value of a suitable loss function. Two general classes
of simple rule are employed. Either an augmented Taylor rule:
(1)

it = i*t + fppt + fyxt + fqqt,

4

where it is the nominal interest rate, i*t is the “natural”
rate, pt is inflation (strictly, the deviation from target),
from its flexible-price level, i.e. the output gap, and qt
some suitably defined normal or equilibrium value). Or
forecast-targeting rule:
(2)

level of the nominal interest
xt is the deviation of output
is an asset price (relative to
else an augmented inflation-

it = i*t + mpEtpt+k + mqqt,

where Et denotes the mathematical expectation conditional on information available
to the policy maker at time t and k is some suitably chosen time horizon.
The authorities are assumed to have an objective function that is quadratic in the
deviation of inflation from target and in the output gap:
k=¥

(3)

Lt = (1-b)Et[ å bk(pt+k2 + lxt+k2)/2],
k=0

where b is a discount factor. As b tends to unity, so this loss function tends to a
simple weighted average of the conditional variances of inflation about the target and
of the output gap. The authors then, in essence, search over the parameters in the
Taylor-type rule (1) and/or the inflation-forecast-targeting rule (2) to find the values
of the feedback coefficients that minimise the loss function (3).
However, it is worth recalling that, despite their appeal, Taylor-type rules imply
feedback from a relatively restricted state vector and the optimal feedback rule can
only be written as a Taylor rule in very simple settings. The same is true of inflationforecast-targeting rules, which furthermore are dynamically inconsistent (see
Svensson, 2001). A relevant question is why we should be interested in whether an
asset price, or indeed any other variable for that matter, appears in some ad hoc class
of feedback rule, even though the coefficients of that rule may have been optimised?
It seems more instructive to ask first what an optimal rule looks like, and then
consider how asset prices ought to figure in it. One might then go on to consider
whether particular simple rules represent sufficiently close approximations to the
optimal rule to be useful guideposts for policy.
In order to say more we need to assume something about the structure of the
economy. Suppose, for illustrative purposes, the demand side is given by a New
Keynesian IS schedule, including the asset price:
(4)

xt = Etxt+1 + (rot – rt)/s + cqt + vt,

where rt (≡ it – Etpt+1) is the real interest rate, rot is the flexible-price, or natural, real
interest rate and vt is an aggregate demand shock. The IS schedule is augmented by a
suitable intertemporal arbitrage condition determining the asset price (including,
perhaps, a bubble component or a stochastic risk premium). And the supply side is
given by a New Keynesian Phillips curve:
(5)

pt = bEtpt+1 + kxt + ut,

5

where ut is a supply (cost) shock. Both shocks are observed by the monetary
authorities and for simplicity are assumed to be serially uncorrelated.
Then, as shown by Svensson and Woodford (1999), Svensson (2002), Giannoni and
Woodford (2002) and others, the optimal policy under discretion satisfies the firstorder condition:
(6)

pt = – (l/k)xt.

This dictates that policy should “lean against the wind” in the event of supply shocks,
but that demand shocks are neutralised. However, in optimising over the choice of
coefficients in the simple rule (1)/(2), the existing literature implicitly assumes that
the central bank has access to a suitable commitment technology. In that case, the
appropriate comparison should be against the optimal policy under commitment
(from the “timeless perspective”), which satisfies the set of first-order conditions, for
all k ³ 0:
(7)

Etpt+k = – (l/k)(Etxt+k – Etxt+k-1).

The optimal plan thus equates the marginal rate of transformation between output and
inflation that is embodied in the supply schedule with the marginal rate of substitution
that is embodied in the loss function. It ensures that inflation will be brought back to
target, but at a rate that recognises the consequences for activity. Svensson has
characterised an optimality condition of this type as describing “flexible inflationforecast targeting”. Note that even though there are no lagged endogenous variables
in the model, the optimal policy is nevertheless history-dependent1. This property
plays an important role in Section 3 below.
A key feature of these optimality conditions is that they contain neither the policy
instrument2, nor indeed anything to do with the structure of the demand side of the
economy. In particular there is no role for asset prices. This observation would hold
true for more general specifications of the economy, provided that the asset price
affects neither the marginal rate of transformation nor the marginal rate of
substitution3. So in that sense the analysis supports the conventional wisdom as
summarised in the quote above from Bernanke and Gertler – with the modification
that policy responds to changes in asset prices only insofar as they signal changes in
expected inflation or activity.
Is this a reasonable interpretation of what inflation-targeting central banks are about,
as opposed to an inflation-forecast-targeting rule like (2)? Take for instance the
1

To see this just set k=0, which gives pt = – (l/k)(xt – xt-1).
If the objective function contains a term in the interest rate, as in Woodford (1999), then the policy
instrument appears in the optimality condition. It is then, however, a rather different animal from the
instrument rules (1) and (2).
3
In an open economy subtle issues arise as to whether the real exchange rate should also appear in the
optimality condition as a result of the impact of the terms of trade on consumer prices. Under some
assumptions, the closed economy model of the text can be translated directly into an open economy
setting (see e.g. Clarida, Gali and Gertler, 2001), but under other formulations that is not necessarily
the case. However, it is clear that the presence of the real exchange rate in the optimality condition
under such circumstances has little to do with arguments about the appropriate response to asset price
bubbles.
2

6

statutory objective of the Bank of England since it was given operational
independence in 1997. The Bank of England Act (1998) charges the Bank “to
maintain price stability, and subject to that to support the economic policy of (the)
government, including the objectives for growth and employment”. An annual Remit
from the Chancellor of the Exchequer then defines price stability – currently as an
annual rate of inflation of 2.5% for RPIX at all times4 – and also fleshes out the
“economic policy of the government”, namely the maintenance of a high and stable
rate of growth. This can be thought of as defining the bliss point for inflation, but
instructing the Monetary Policy Committee to seek to achieve it in a way that avoids
undue volatility in economic activity. However, the remit is non-specific about the
relative weight that we should put on deviations of output from potential and
deviations of inflation from target. Both King (1997) and Bean (1998) discuss the UK
inflation-targeting regime in these terms; the latter also explores the consequences of
the incompleteness of the remit.
Similarly the objectives of the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) as laid out in the
Reserve Bank Act (1959) are “to ensure that...monetary and banking policy...is
directed...(so as to) contribute to: the stability of the currency...; the maintenance of
full employment...; and the economic prosperity and welfare of the people”. The
counterpart of the UK Remit from the Chancellor in Australia is the joint Statement
on the Conduct of Monetary Policy between the Governor and the Treasurer. The
target is for an inflation rate for the underlying CPI of 2-3% “over the cycle”. Again
the “first-level” target for inflation is specified explicitly, together with a general
injunction that the central bank should care about the level of activity. I think this
view of what monetary policy makers are seeking to achieve is also a fair description
of central banks like the Federal Reserve or the European Central Bank that do not
describe themselves explicitly as inflation targeters.
But that does leave open the extent to which asset prices should affect the setting of
the instrument, because they will affect the outlook for growth and inflation. Given
the relevant optimality condition, the IS schedule (5) can be used to back out the
associated value of the instrument, it. Clearly this reaction function in general will
contain the asset price, qt. That is consistent with the views of Cecchetti et al., though
the finding that the inclusion of asset prices in an augmented Taylor or inflationforecast-targeting rule reduces the expected loss does not imply an independent role
for asset prices beyond their impact on the outlook for inflation and activity. And, in
fairness to Cecchetti et al., they never really claim it does.
The substantive issue that divides those who advocate a more activist response to
asset prices from those who do not, is really the extent to which asset prices
movements are informative about the prospects for inflation and growth, and whether
pre-emptive action against a bubble is either possible or effective. Here it is worth
recalling the difficulty of establishing significant and stable econometric relationships
between asset prices and subsequent movements in output or inflation; see e.g. Stock
and Watson (2001) for a recent survey. But there are good reasons why such links
should be unstable as asset prices can move for a variety of reasons, each of which
may have different implications for growth and inflation.
4

The Chancellor has recently announced his intention to switch the targeted measure to the
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) at a future date.

7

For instance, even if valued according to their fundamentals, equity prices could fall
because of a reduction in expected future earnings, an increase in the expected riskfree discount rate, or a change in the equity risk premium. And that reduction in
earnings might come about because of e.g. a fall in the expected rate of growth of
productivity, an increase in corporate taxes, or an increase in product market
competition. And finally equity prices may include a non-fundamental or bubble
component. But these various shocks all have rather different implications for growth
and inflation, either qualitatively or quantitatively.
That suggests that an automatic response to any single asset price is likely to be in
general inappropriate, as stressed by Goodfriend (2002). As an aside we might note
that this applies not only to equity prices, but also to exchange rates. Monetary
Conditions Indices (MCIs) that weight together nominal interest rates and the
exchange rate are often used to indicate whether monetary conditions have changed,
on the argument that a fall in the exchange rate – seen as a monetary variable – boosts
demand in the same way as does a reduction in nominal interest rates. But this
ignores the fact that the exchange rate can change for a variety of reasons, including
shifts in preferences or productive potential at home or abroad, changes in current or
expected interest rates, changes in portfolio preferences and risk premia, and bubbles
and fads. The nature of the shock, as well as the initial degree of over- or
undervaluation of the exchange rate, will affect the pass-through into activity and
inflation and consequently the appropriate monetary response.
The danger in following an MCI too closely in setting policy is well illustrated by the
experience of New Zealand during the Asia crisis. At that time the Reserve Bank of
New Zealand (RBNZ) employed an MCI as an operating target for the
implementation of monetary policy. As a consequence the depreciation of the New
Zealand dollar during 1997-8 led more or less automatically to an increase in
domestic interest rates. But the depreciation of the Kiwi dollar was part of a more
general depreciation of currencies in the region, and was associated with a contraction
in the markets for New Zealand exports. A more appropriate monetary response
would have been to reduce interest rates – as the RBA did – rather than to raise them.
Australia’s subsequent economic performance was noticeably superior to that of New
Zealand, and the RBNZ abandoned an MCI as an operating target the following year.
But the fact that asset prices may move for a variety of reasons is not a justification
for ignoring them completely. Rather, as stressed by Cecchetti at al., it is an argument
for using the full array of asset prices and other information in order to try to extract
an estimate of the underlying shocks driving them. Policy makers are already used to
trying to draw such inferences from the co-movements of a set of variables, and even
an imperfect estimate of the underlying shocks is better than ignoring the information
altogether. The case for exploiting the information contained in asset prices thus
seems irrefutable in principle, though the difficulties involved in doing so are
considerable and due recognition needs to be paid to the imprecision of the resulting
estimates.
As to the possibility of preventing asset price bubbles and misalignments through preemptive action, I am rather more sceptical. As with the more general problem of
imbalances discussed below, early diagnosis of such problems is fraught with
difficulties. Once one can be fairly confident that a bubble has emerged, it is probably

8

too late to take significant action against it without causing just the disruption to the
real economy that one wants to avoid. If one is confident that an asset price bubble
will continue, then one might want to raise interest rates in order to try to moderate it.
But the presence of lags between an interest rate change and its effect on the real
economy means that if one expects the bubble to burst imminently, then policy
relaxation is appropriate now in order to prepare for the fallout. Tightening policy to
deal with an asset price bubble may thus end up being counterproductive if the bubble
then bursts, so that the economy is subject to the twin deflationary impulses of an
asset price collapse and the lagged policy tightening. Gruen, Plumb and Stone (2003)
explore this issue and show that the informational requirements necessary to make
such activist policy effective are extreme. At best there seems likely to be only a very
narrow window of opportunity during which action is likely to be effective.

3

Financial imbalances and monetary policy

Borio and Lowe (2002) argue persuasively that the issue is not really whether
monetary policy should respond to asset price bubbles per se. Rather booms and busts
in asset prices – which may reflect the presence of bubbles, but may also reflect shifts
in assessments of the underlying fundamentals – should be seen as part of a broader
set of symptoms that typically also include a build-up of debt and frequently a high
rate of capital accumulation. Thus during a period of exuberance – irrational or
otherwise – optimism about future returns drives up asset values, prompting private
agents to borrow in order to finance capital accumulation. Moreover, appreciating
asset values raise the value of collateral, hence facilitating the accumulation of debt.
During the upswing, balance sheets may look healthy as the appreciation in asset
values offsets the build-up of debt. But if that optimism turns to pessimism, leading to
a correction in asset valuations and a sharp deterioration in net worth, then financial
distress may be the result as the financial imbalances are exposed. That is particularly
likely if financial intermediaries respond to the deterioration in their own, and their
creditors’, balance sheets by tightening credit conditions. This process may apply to
the corporate sector and productive capital, but may equally well apply to the
household sector and housing capital.
Borio and Lowe also argue that while low and stable inflation may promote financial
stability overall, such financial imbalances can nevertheless build up in a low
inflation environment. Indeed beneficial supply shocks – resulting either from faster
productivity growth or from structural or institutional reform – are likely both to
lower inflationary pressure and to foster the build-up of such imbalances. And that
may be aggravated when monetary policy has a high degree of counter-inflationary
credibility as excessive expansion in aggregate demand beyond the natural rate of
output may have only limited impact on inflationary pressures.
In order to explore some of the implications of debt-financed asset accumulation for
the conduct of monetary policy, I shall employ a simple New Keynesian
macroeconomic model of the sort considered above, modified to allow for debtfinanced capital accumulation and the possibility of credit crunches.
There are two types of agents in the economy: households and firms. Households
supply labour and save a constant fraction of their income. They also own a nontradable diversified portfolio of shares in firms, so that all profits are returned to

9

households in lump-sum form. Firms are monopolistic competitors, and nominal
prices are fixed with a fraction of prices being re-set each period as in the standard
New Keynesian Phillips curve. Capital lasts a single period, is installed a period in
advance, and is financed entirely by borrowing from households. Debt lasts a single
period and is denominated in real terms.
Credit crunches occur with a fixed probability, ρ. When they do occur their effect is
to lower the level of supply in the economy. One rationalisation for this assumption
could be that a credit crunch leads to bankruptcies and the necessary administration or
reorganisation of the firm’s assets absorbs resources. Another could be that firms
need access to working capital within the period in order to pay their workers, buy
inputs, etc. If firms cannot get access to the required working capital then their supply
will necessarily be curtailed. In effect a credit crunch is thus treated as a negative
shock to total factor productivity, though it reflects events in financial markets rather
than a change in the technical capabilities of the economy.
Moreover, if a credit crunch does occur, it is assumed to be more severe the higher is
the overall debt outstanding. It is this feature that provides the incentive for the
central bank to moderate a current debt-financed investment boom. Since an
individual firm’s borrowing decision has negligible impact on overall debt, firms
ignore the impact of their borrowing on the severity of any future credit crunch, ie
there is a negative externality present. Of course, in that case the first-best policy
would be to invoke other policies that tackle the market failures more directly, such
as prudential capital requirements, etc. Nevertheless, it seems fruitful for central
bankers to ask how monetary policy should be conducted in a second-best world
where those market failures remain.
The equations of the model are developed in an Annex, but can be reduced to a
conventional New Keynesian Phillips curve, as in equation (5), and a forward-looking
IS schedule:
(8)

xt = hEtxt+1 + rot – rt + vt.

This is similar to the standard New Keynesian IS schedule, though its interpretation is
somewhat different. In particular the terms on the right-hand side reflect the
determinants of investment, rather than consumption as in the standard approach. A
high level of expected future output increases the marginal product of capital, thus
encouraging investment, while it is discouraged by a high cost of capital. Likewise
the shock, vt, can be thought of as reflecting the “animal spirits” of entrepreneurs.
Now consider the central bank’s control problem. Crucially we assume the objective
is to stabilise output around its technically feasible level, ie the natural rate of output
that would obtain in the absence of a credit crunch. In the Annex it is shown that the
output gap relative to the natural rate that would apply in the absence of a credit
crunch, x*t, can be expressed as:
(9)

x*t = xt – [n(v + ωvt-1) + ωηEt-1xt]et,

where et is an indicator variable that takes the value unity (zero) if a credit crunch
occurs (does not occur) and the other Greek symbols are parameters (v and ω

10

parameterise the cost of a credit crunch, and η and n are functions of tastes and
technology). The quantity in square brackets represents the output cost of a credit
crunch, with terms reflecting the fact that debt carried into the period will be high if
“animal spirits” had been buoyant in the preceding period or if output had been
expected to be high.
It is noteworthy that the impact of the credit crunch is not affected directly by the rate
of interest in the preceding period. A higher rate of interest reduces capital formation
and debt accumulation during period t-1, but that is exactly nullified by the higher
interest payments on the debt. Consequently the total amount that has to be repaid is
left unchanged. In general whether an increase in the rate of interest in period t-1
raises or lowers the debt stock in period t depends on the semi-elasticity of borrowing
with respect to the interest rate. In the present example the assumption of a CobbDouglas technology ensures that this is unity, so that the two effects exactly offset.
This means that the effect of monetary policy today on the severity of any future
credit crunch must operate entirely through its impact on the expected future level of
activity.
First consider the case when the central bank is unable to commit. In the Annex it is
shown that the optimal monetary policy can be characterised by the optimality
condition:
(10)

pt = – (l/k)x*t.

This is analogous to equation (6) above, except that it is written in terms of the output
gap measured relative to the level of potential output that would obtain in the absence
of a credit crunch. Thus in the absence of a credit crunch (ie, x*t = xt), policy is
unaffected by the possibility of credit crunches in the future. If, on the other hand,
there is a credit crunch in period t (ie, x*t < xt), policy is set looser than it would
otherwise be. So policy is in effect as espoused by Chairman Greenspan in the
quotation at the start of section 2 (though perhaps for a different reason): ignore the
bubble in the upswing, but mitigate the fallout if and when it bursts. Furthermore the
possibility of such a loose monetary policy in the face of a credit crunch tomorrow
will raise expected inflation in the Phillips curve (5) today. Consequently, even in the
absence of a credit crunch there will be an upward bias to inflation today.
The reason that the possibility of future credit crunches does not affect policy in the
upswing directly (there is an indirect effect via inflation expectations) is quite simple.
Tightening policy today has no effect of the debt-income ratio that obtains tomorrow,
because the reduction in investment and borrowing is exactly counterbalanced by the
higher interest payments entailed. The only way the debt-income ratio can be affected
is by lowering expectations of future activity, but this is impossible when the
monetary authorities cannot precommit.
Now suppose the monetary authorities can precommit. In the Annex it is shown that
the “timelessly optimal” plan under commitment satisfies the optimality conditions
(for all t and for all k ≥ 0):
(11)

Etpt+k = – [l(1–rwh)/k](Etx*t+k – Etx*t+k-1).

11

The structural similarity to the model of Section 2 – obtained by setting r to zero –
makes it easy to see the impact of the possibility of a credit crunch on policy design.
Assuming that rwh < 1, introducing the possibility of a credit crunch is similar in
effect to reducing the weight on output in the central bank’s objective function
(compare also with equation (7)).
That there is apparently less incentive to stabilise current output when the economy is
overheating and building up larger imbalances today5 may appear counterintuitive.
However, recall that this model is forward-looking in nature. And, though an increase
in interest rates today cannot affect the severity of a credit crunch tomorrow because
the interest semi-elasticity of borrowing is unity, policy does affect debt levels
through another channel, namely expectations of the future output gap. The
expectation of a large positive output gap tomorrow thus boosts capital accumulation
today, so raising the future debt stock and the costs associated with a credit crunch.
Now, as noted in Section 2, optimal policy in the standard New Keynesian model
without credit crunches is history-dependent despite the absence of any backwardlooking structural dynamics. That is because the optimal policy exploits the fact that a
credible commitment to hold output above potential in the future raises inflation
today via the expectations term in the Phillips curve. Thus, given the convexity of the
loss function, the optimal response to a temporary supply disturbance involves a
small, but persistent, output gap, rather than returning inflation straightaway to target
through a larger, but more short-lived, one. Demand shocks are contemporaneously
and fully neutralised, of course.
When there is a possibility of a credit crunch, however, the gradualist response to,
say, a beneficial supply shock generates additional expected future costs in the shape
of a more severe credit crunch, should one occur. Consequently the optimal policy
involves a less accommodative policy today, ie more variation in the current output
gap, and less persistence than in the standard set-up. Moreover, the optimal policy
under commitment involves a weaker monetary policy response to the occurrence of a
credit crunch than is the case under discretion. That is because the central bank
recognises that a policy of accommodating credit crunches through the loosening of
monetary policy has adverse effects on inflation expectations. Consequently there is
less monetary response to a credit crunch than under discretion, but average inflation
is lower. There are echoes here of the supposed dangers of the “Greenspan put” (see
Miller, Weller and Zhang, 2002).
Of course this model is rather simple and omits some important channels whereby
policy can influence the accumulation and unwinding of imbalances. Consequently
the results may not be robust (though Groth, 2003, develops a somewhat different
model that shares some of the same characteristics). Nevertheless the analysis
illustrates the fact that allowing for such phenomena in a forward-looking setting may
affect the design of policy in subtle, as well as more obvious, ways.
One aspect that is missing from the analysis is an explicit role for asset prices. Falling
asset prices reduce collateral and may induce a sharp change in the behaviour of
potential borrowers as collateral constraints start to bind. That can act as an important
5

Recall that the constant savings rate assumption implies that higher output must be associated with
higher capital formation and therefore more debt accumulation.

12

amplification and propagation mechanism, as in the work of Kiyotaki and Moore
(1997). Bordo and Jeanne (2002) construct a model in which firms can only borrow
against collateral, and a credit crunch occurs if asset prices fall sufficiently. As in the
model of this paper, the credit crunch then leads to a loss of output. But the resulting
model is highly non-linear, and Bordo and Jeanne show that an appropriately
forward-looking policy that responds to the initial asset price inflation and build-up of
debt by pre-emptively raising interest rates6 dominates a purely reactive policy that
responds to current inflation and activity.
Bordo and Jeanne go on to conclude that this demonstrates that a monetary policy that
reacts only to output and inflation is insufficient, and that a (non-linear) response to
asset prices, etc, is also desirable. They suggest this is inconsistent with inflation
targeting. However, Bordo and Jeanne assume a standard loss function that is
quadratic in the output gap and inflation. If one accepts the argument that an inflation
target is really a statement about the objective function rather than the reaction
function, a flexible inflation targeter would also choose their recommended policy.
But their analysis does suggest that a richer interest rate reaction function may be
required in the pursuance of that inflation target.
Financial instability and credit crunches are probably of the greatest significance
when they adversely affect the supply potential of the economy. But even without
such adverse supply effects, the unwinding of financial imbalances may cause
problems for the design and conduct of monetary policy. In most settings, the
appropriate response to the fall in aggregate demand occasioned by the unwinding of
cumulative imbalances, triggered say by a fall in asset prices or a downward revision
in expectations about future income or earnings, is simply to offset the shock to
demand by lowering interest rates. But this may not be possible if the zero lower
bound on nominal interest rates starts to bind. Although other monetary policy
options may be available, including purchases of a broader range of assets than the
central bank usually undertakes, as well as more exotic approaches such as taxing
money balances à la Gesell (1958), their effectiveness is less certain than
conventional interest rate policy. Consequently it will make sense to conduct a policy
during the period of accumulating imbalances that reduces the likelihood of
encountering the zero lower bound as the imbalances unwind.
Stochastic simulations with macroeconometric models suggest that, at an average
inflation rate of 2%, the fraction of time spent at the zero lower bound is likely to be
around 2%. And even for an average inflation rate of 1%, the corresponding figure is
only up to around 5% (see the studies surveyed in Yates, 2003). That might appear to
suggest this is not likely to be a very serious issue. But those stochastic simulations
assume shocks similar to those experienced in the past. The unwinding of imbalances
is likely to be sharp, particularly in the context of a credit crunch or similar financial
instability, and so corresponds to shock realisations in the bottom tail of the
distribution. That suggests the zero lower bound on interest rates provides a more
compelling argument for pre-emptive action to prevent the build-up of imbalances in
the first place7.
6

This channel is absent in the model described in this paper because of the assumption that the semielasticity of debt with respect to the interest rate is unity.
7
Note that this argument suggests that greater uncertainty may lead to greater policy activism, in
contrast to the classic Brainard (1967) result.

13

A second consideration arises from the fact that a sharp unwinding of imbalances is
likely to make aggregate demand somewhat less predictable than normal. Knowledge
of the current state of the economy is highly imperfect – unlike in the models above –
and increased uncertainty about demand will inevitably be transmitted into greater
variability in activity. Moreover the impact of interest rate changes on aggregate
demand is also likely to become more uncertain in such an environment, especially if
credit channel effects assume greater importance or if there is a credit crunch. Greater
uncertainty about policy multipliers will then impact on the optimal policy setting, eg
as in the seminal analysis of Brainard (1967).
In this case one would expect there to be something of a trade-off facing the policy
maker. Action taken today to reduce the build-up of imbalances might pay off in the
longer term by reducing the future uncertainty that the policy maker will face as the
imbalances unwind. But, as before, that seems entirely consistent with the approach
of flexible inflation targets, taken as a description of the objectives of policy rather
than the route whereby they are achieved.

4

Identifying imbalances: a case study

These considerations suggest that even inflation targetters – indeed especially
inflation targetters – should take cognisance of the risks to future macroeconomic
stability posed by cumulating financial imbalances and/or asset price misalignments.
No additional consideration of asset prices or financial imbalances need be introduced
into the description of the objectives of policy beyond inflation and activity. But as it
may be some while before imbalances unwind or misalignments correct, the policy
maker does need to look sufficiently far ahead in assessing the risks to the outlook
posed by the build-up of imbalances and misalignments.
A key issue is, of course, the identification of threatening imbalances before they
grow too large. But without the wisdom of hindsight, it is often hard to identify those
that pose a real threat, as rapid debt accumulation or large asset price movements may
be a rational and justified response to a change in the economic environment. The
empirical results of Borio and Lowe (2002), building on Kaminsky and Reinhart
(1999), seek to develop indicators of imminent financial crises based on the joint
behaviour of asset prices, credit and investment and using only information available
to the policy maker at the time. Such indicators will no doubt be a useful addition to
the armoury of central banks, but early diagnosis of incipient imbalances is always
likely to be difficult. By the time it is obvious that there is a problem, it may be too
late to do much about it – at least with conventional macroeconomic tools – without
causing the macroeconomic instability that the policy maker wishes to avoid.
Moreover, as noted by a number of authors, the greater counter-inflationary
credibility of monetary policy in the last decade or so itself complicates the
identification of imbalances (see, eg, Borio and Lowe or Goodfriend, 2002). Debt
accumulation is likely to prove excessive if it is associated with unsustainably high
levels of activity. When credibility was low, levels of activity above the natural rate
tended to show up relatively quickly in accelerating inflation. But a feature of the last
decade has been the apparent flattening of the short-run output-inflation trade-off (see
Figure 1). There are at least three possible reasons for this. First, New Keynesian

14

models of nominal price inertia relying on the presence of menu costs suggest that the
slope of the output-inflation trade-off should be flatter at low average inflation rates
(Ball, Mankiw and Romer, 1988). Second, models of the Phillips curve in which
expectations of inflation play a role – whether of the Friedman-Phelps-Lucas or New
Keynesian varieties – suggest that an increase in activity above the natural rate will
raise inflation less if those expectations are well anchored. Consequently the
enhanced belief that monetary policy will be used to stabilise inflation will itself help
to keep inflation low. Moreover that credibility will also help to stabilise long-term
interest rates. Third, increased competitive pressures in product markets, associated in
particular with increased international trade, may also act to restrain inflationary
pressures.
In such a world, excess debt accumulation and levels of demand above the natural
rate will not immediately show up in higher inflation rates. Moreover, that in itself
may encourage market participants and policy makers to believe that the natural rate
of output is higher than it really is. That in turn is likely to boost asset prices, further
raising demand. Instead of showing up in inflation, the excess demand will show up
in other indicators, such as profit rates, measures of labour shortage and the like. That
suggests focussing attention on other indicators, as well as inflation, in identifying
when demand is excessive and imbalances are unsustainable.
Rather than add to the body of work that seeks to develop early-warning indicators of
potentially dangerous imbalances, I conclude with a review of current developments
in the United Kingdom that illustrates the difficulties in assessing whether or not asset
price movements and credit growth constitute a potential problem. A key feature of
the UK economy in the past six years has been the buoyancy of household spending
which has consistently grown faster than output, in both real and nominal terms (see
Figure 2). And associated with that has been a build-up of household debt and rapid
house price inflation (see Figures 3 and 4). Moreover the Bank of England’s
Monetary Policy Committee has over the past two years sought to offset the impact of
the global slowdown by relaxing policy in order to further boost domestic spending,
and in particular private consumption. That has added to the accumulation of
household debt and raised house prices further. Is there any evidence that the
financial imbalances in the household sector have reached the point where they might
pose a threat to the economic outlook?
In addressing this question, it is helpful first to ask why consumer demand might have
been so buoyant. Standard theory suggests that it should be “permanent” income
rather than current income that drives consumer spending, though the extent to which
households will shift expenditure intertemporally will also depend on the cost of
borrowing and the return to saving. The recent strong growth in consumption has
coincided with robust growth in real disposable household incomes and falling
unemployment, and for a while also with rising equity prices. So one explanation for
the strength of consumer spending is that households have been revising up their
assessment of their permanent income. To the extent that there has indeed been an
increase in households’ permanent income, then we would expect consumption
growth in due course to fall back in line – or strictly speaking a little below – the rate
of growth of their income, with the extra accumulated debt being gradually repaid.
But if expectations prove to be over-optimistic then a sharper future correction to
consumer spending is likely.

15

Furthermore a significant fraction of the increase in real household incomes has been
associated with the substantial improvement in the terms of trade – up 13% since
1996 (see Figure 5). An important issue is whether the improvement from this source
is permanent, reflecting the exploitation of comparative advantage, or whether it is
associated instead with a temporarily high level of the exchange rate, in which case
real incomes and consumption will eventually both drop back. The answer to this
question is not obvious.
A second explanation for the rapid growth in consumer spending and debt is easier
access to, or cheaper, borrowing. Here house prices enter the picture. The most
important channel through which house prices affect consumer spending is probably
not via a conventional wealth effect. Rather it is through increasing the value of the
collateral against which owners – who would otherwise be credit-constrained – can
borrow, or else by allowing them to borrow at lower rates. The higher house prices of
recent years have allowed owner-occupiers to increase their borrowing, using the
proceeds in part to boost spending. That is reflected in high rates of mortgage equity
withdrawal, currently estimated to be equivalent to about 7% of personal disposable
income (see Figure 3).
But why has the price of houses risen? The demand for housing services should be
driven by the same factors that drive the demand for consumer goods and services, ie,
permanent income. Figure 4 also shows the evolution of house prices relative to the
nominal value of consumer spending per household (a proxy for consumers’
estimates of their permanent income). That ratio has risen sharply in recent years,
although the picture is not quite as dramatic as when house prices are compared to
earnings.
So something else has also been driving house prices, and with them the value of the
collateral against which owner-occupiers can borrow. At first glance Figure 4 might
seem to indicate an incipient house-price bubble, but there are at least three reasons
why the demand for housing might have risen more than might be suggested simply
by looking at permanent income. First, the transition to a low inflation environment
implies that nominal interest rates should also be lower on average. As standard
mortgages entail an even flow of nominal payments over the life of the mortgage, the
initial real payments on a given nominal debt are smaller than they would be if
inflation and interest rates were high, with the real burden of payments towards the
end of the loan period being correspondingly greater. Shifting the pattern of real
payments into the future in this way makes households that are constrained by their
cash flow more willing or able to borrow, thus driving up the demand for housing.
But a legitimate concern is that borrowers may not have fully factored in the
corresponding increase in future real payments. Second, increased competition
amongst lenders and the application of better credit scoring techniques may have
increased the supply of loans. And third, population growth and demographic
developments – more people wanting to live alone and an increased desire for second
homes – will also have boosted demand.
In addition, on the supply side of the market, the rate of construction of new
dwellings in the United Kingdom has lagged behind the expansion in the number of
households, in part because of a shortage of land and the impact of planning

16

restrictions. Figure 6 shows that the ratio of dwellings to households – a measure of
spare capacity in the housing market – has been steadily falling over the last two
decades. One might reasonably expect that this might also be reflected in higher
house prices relative to nominal consumption per household.
In sum, there are good reasons why a higher house-prices-to-consumption ratio (or
house-prices-to-earnings ratio) might be warranted by underlying economic
developments. But there is inevitably very considerable uncertainty about the
underlying equilibrium value of house prices. An optimal monetary policy almost
certainly would dictate a differential response to a movement in house prices
associated with a misalignment to one that is associated with movements in the
fundamentals. Yet diagnosing whether there is a misalignment is far from
straightforward.
Whether the movement in house prices is justified by fundamentals or not is clearly
also central to assessing whether there is any danger posed by the build-up of
household debt that is the counterpart to the increase in the value of housing wealth.
But even if a sharp correction were to occur to house prices, it would not necessarily
imply a correspondingly sharp fall in household spending. Net household wealth
would fall, but rational consumers would spread the required adjustment over the rest
of their lives. Even consumers who were credit constrained and had previously
exploited the higher collateral to increase their borrowing would not need to cut back
their spending sharply unless the lender were to foreclose on them for some reason8.
High levels of outstanding debt could, however, increase the impact on consumer
spending of other adverse shocks to activity, especially those leading to higher
unemployment. Households with adequate liquid assets, or who can still access the
credit market, would not need to cut back their consumption much if they experience
a spell of unemployment, assuming it does not harm their future earning potential.
Instead they would simply run down their savings or borrow more. On the other hand,
households with no assets, and who cannot borrow, would be forced to cut back
spending in line with their reduced income. So the impact of this adverse shock on
aggregate consumption will be greater, the higher is the fraction of constrained
households. Furthermore that fraction will tend to be higher, the greater is the amount
of debt already extended.
So a key question is whether those who hold the debt are particularly likely to be
exposed to adverse shocks, such as job loss, and whether they have other assets that
they could run down. The good news is that it is those households who hold the most
debt who also tend to have higher income and more assets (see Figure 7). But this is
not very surprising as most of the debt is in the form of mortgages and bigger
mortgages are typically associated with more expensive houses!
Perhaps more relevant in assessing the potential vulnerability of the household sector
to shocks is the matching of debts to liquid assets. Here the news is not quite so good.
8

Note that the mere fact that the value of the collateral is less than the value of the loan does not
necessarily imply the borrower will choose to walk away from the debt and forfeit the asset. Some
borrowers may, for reputational reasons, prefer to repay their debts even though are worth more than
the value of the collateralised asset. Hence lenders, having extended the loan on the basis of what turns
out to be a temporarily inflated collateral value, may prefer not to foreclose.

17

Figure 8 illustrates the distribution of total liabilities and liquid assets across
individual households, drawn from a 10% random sample of the 5,000 households in
the 2000 British Household Panel Survey. It is notable that a large fraction of
households are positioned on one or other axis. In particular roughly a third had no
liquid assets to speak of. This suggests that the financial position of the household
sector might be rather less resilient than is suggested merely by looking at aggregate
balance sheet data.
This example illustrates the problems that confront policy makers in assessing
whether strong credit growth and asset price appreciation are merely the consequence
of movements in underlying economic fundamentals or represent something more
dangerous. Moreover, even if it is the latter, aggregate data may need to be
supplemented by microeconomic information in order to evaluate in full the possible
problems caused by their unwinding.
5.

Concluding remarks

Financial imbalances, asset price misalignments and the instability that may result as
they correct may pose significant problems for monetary policy makers. Achieving
price stability is no guarantee that financial instability can be avoided. But taking
account of financial imbalances in the design of monetary policy does not require a
change in the formal structure of inflation targets. Significant financial instability
invariably will also have a significant impact on activity and inflation. The attraction
of inflation targets is that they focus on the goals of policy – not the means by which
they are achieved, as is the case under regimes such as money supply targets and
fixed exchange rates. An inflation targeting regime comprising a “first-level” target
for the inflation rate together with a subsidiary objective of stabilising activity is a
practical solution to the problem of describing the principal’s objective function. A
flexible inflation targeter – in the specific sense of Svensson – does not then require
the explicit addition of financial imbalances or asset prices to be added to their remit.
Rather the implications of possible imbalances and misalignments for the
macroeconomic goal variables must necessarily be factored into the assessment of
expectations of future growth and inflation in order to execute the optimal plan. So
the answer to the question posed in the title of this paper is: Yes, (flexible) inflation
targets are enough. But taking on board the possible risks posed by cumulating
financial imbalances may require a shift in the rhetoric of inflation targetters towards
the longer term.
More investigation is, however, needed into understanding the way in which financial
imbalances and asset price misalignments in practice affect economic prospects.
There are at least two distinct sets of issues where further work would be useful. First,
it would be helpful to advance our ability to detect when rapid credit expansion and
asset price increases are symptomatic of the development of underlying imbalances
that are susceptible to future correction, rather than simply reflecting sustainable
movements in the underlying economic fundamentals. Second, improving our
understanding of how imbalances unwind and their associated costs would facilitate
the design of appropriate policies, on both the monetary and regulatory front. It is safe
to assume that these two issues will remain on the agenda for both monetary
economists and central bankers for many years to come.

18

Annex
There are two types of agents in the economy: households and firms. Households are
infinitely lived, supply labour, consume and can borrow and lend freely. All debt lasts
a single period and is denominated in real terms. Households also own a non-tradable
diversified portfolio of shares in firms, so that all profits are returned to households in
lump-sum form. Firms are monopolistic competitors, and nominal prices are fixed
with a fraction of prices being re-set each period as in the standard New Keynesian
Phillips curve. Capital lasts a single period, has to be installed a period in advance,
and is financed entirely by borrowing from households.
Credit crunches occur with a fixed probability, r. When they do occur their effect is
to lower the level of supply in the economy. In effect a credit crunch is a negative
shock to total factor productivity, though it reflects events in financial markets rather
than a change in the technical capabilities of the economy. If a credit crunch does
occur, it is assumed to be more severe the higher is the level of overall debt
outstanding. An individual firm’s borrowing decision has a negligible impact on
overall debt. Consequently firms ignore the impact of their borrowing on the severity
of any future credit crunch, ie there is a negative externality present.
The production function is Cobb-Douglas in capital and labour:
(A1)

yt = at + αkt + (1–α)nt,

where yt is (the logarithm of) output in period t, at is (the logarithm of) total factor
productivity in period t, kt is (the logarithm of) the capital stock at the start of period
t, inherited from the previous period and nt is (the logarithm of) employment in period
t. Total factor productivity is given by the process:
(A2)

at = et - [v + w(dt – Et-1yt)]et,

where et is a shock to the technology, dt is the (logarithm of) debt outstanding and et
is an indicator variable that takes the value unity if a credit crunch occurs and zero
otherwise. The severity of the credit crunch thus depends on the debt-to-(expected)output ratio. We write (A2) in terms of expected output rather than realised output
because the latter depends on whether a credit crunch occurs or not; writing the credit
crunch in terms of realised output complicates the analysis considerably.
Equation (A1) may be inverted to give labour demand conditional on the level of
output
(A3)

nt = (yt – at – αkt)/(1–α),

The demand for capital is then obtained by minimising expected costs, conditional on
the expected future level of output and recognising that employment will
subsequently be determined through the labour requirement equation (A3):
(A4)

kt+1 = Etyt+1 – Etat+1 + (1–α)(Etwt+1 – Etpt+1 – rt + vt)
= Etnt+1 + Etwt+1 – Etpt+1 – rt + vt,

19

where wt is (the logarithm of) the nominal wage in period t, pt is (the logarithm of)
the price level in period t, rt is the real rate of return on debt and vt can be thought of
as representing a shock to “animal spirits”, ie irrationally over- or under-optimistic
expectations. For simplicity, vt is assumed to be serially uncorrelated, and inessential
constants are normalised to zero through appropriate choice of units throughout.
Following Calvo (1983), prices are set on a staggered basis, with those firms that are
able to change their price choosing an optimal one based on expected marginal cost.
(A5)

pt = bEtpt+1 + δmt + ut,

where mt (= wt – pt + nt – yt) is (the logarithm of) marginal cost and ut is an
uncorrelated shock to the mark-up.
Turning to the household sector, savings are assumed to be a constant fraction of
income, and labour supply is an increasing function of the real wage alone:
(A6)

wt – pt = fnt.

The model can be developed along standard lines with an inter-temporal optimality
equation for consumption and a corresponding intra-temporal optimality condition for
labour supply, but that merely complicates the dynamics without changing the basic
insights.
Given the constant savings rate assumption, an IS schedule can then be obtained from
(A4) and using the equality of marginal cost and the labour share:
(A7)

yt = Etyt+1 + Etmt+1 – rt + vt.

This is similar to the standard New Keynesian IS curve, save for the appearance of
expected marginal cost.
Using equations (A3) and (A6), marginal cost is
(A8)

mt = (a+f)yt/(1–a) – (1+f)(at + akt)/(1–a).

The flexible price level of output, yot, is then obtained by setting mt = 0:
(A9)

yot = n(at + akt),

where n = (1+f)/(a+f). The model may then be condensed into the two equations:
(A10)

pt = bEtpt+1 + kxt + ut,

where xt (= yt – yot) is the output gap and k = d(a+f)/(1–a), and:
(A11)

xt = hEtxt+1 + rot – rt + vt,

20

where rot = Etyot+1 – yot is the natural real rate of interest and h = (1+f)/(1–a) (=
kn/d).
The policy maker seeks to stabilise output around its technically feasible level:
(A12)

y*t = n(et + akt).

When there is no credit crunch, this is just the same as the flexible price equilibrium,
yot. But when a credit crunch occurs, there will be a gap between the two, which is
larger the greater is the current debt-output ratio. Using the fact that dt = kt + rt-1, the
relevant gap, x*t is:
(A13)

x*t = (yt – yot) + (yot – y*t )
= xt – n[v + w(kt + rt-1 – Et-1yt)]et
= xt – [n(v + ωvt-1) + ωηEt-1xt]et.

Consider first the optimal policy under discretion. Under discretion, the central bank
is forced to treat private sector expectations as exogenous and unaffected by its
current policy choice in carrying out the optimisation; let Ē denote such a private
sector expectation. The Lagrangian for the optimisation problem for the central bank
at date t may then be written:
t=¥

(A14)

Wt = (1-β)Et[ å bt-t{(pt2 + lx*t2)/2 + jt(pt – bĒtpt+1 – kx*t – zt)}]
t=t

where zt = κ[n(v + ωvt-1) + ωηĒt-1xt]et + ut. The first-order conditions are, for all t³t:
(A15)

0 = pt + jt

(A16)

0 = lx*t – kjt.

Eliminating the multiplier gives:
(A17)

pτ = – (l/k)x*τ.

This is essentially the same as equation (6) of the text, but written in terms of the
deviation of output from its technically feasible level, rather than the flexible price
equilibrium.
Now consider the optimal policy when the central bank is able to pre-commit, in
which case it will take account of how private sector expectations will be affected by
its choice of policy. First note that equation (A13) implies that:
(A18)

Et-1x*t = (1–rwh)Et-1xt – nρ(v + wvt-1).

Using this, the Lagrangian for the central bank’s optimisation problem at date t may
be written:

21

t=¥

(A19)

Wt = (1-β)Et[ å bt-t{(pt2 + lx*t2)/2 + jt(pt – bpt+1 – kx*t – zt)}]
t=t

where:

zτ = κ[n(v + ωvτ-1) + ωηEτ-1xτ]eτ + uτ

and, for all t > t:

zt = k[n(v + wvt-1) + whEt-1x*t]eτ /(1–rwh) + ut.

The first-order conditions are then:
(A20)

0 = pt + jt – jt-1

(A21)

0 = lx*t – kjt

(A22)

0 = lx*t – kjt/(1–rwh)

for all t ³ t, with jt-1 = 0

for all t > t.

These equations describe a “τ-optimal” equilibrium, reflecting the fact that
expectations formed prior to date τ are treated as bygones. As noted by Svensson and
Woodford (1999), it would not be optimal to stick to this plan for dates after τ, ie it is
time inconsistent. But if the authorities can pre-commit, it makes sense to consider
not the “τ-optimal” solution, but rather a “timelessly optimal” plan in which the
optimisation is assumed to occur arbitrarily far in the past and so is independent of
initial conditions. In that case, the initial condition jt-1=0 and the first-order condition
(A21) that treats Eτ-1xτ in zτ as a bygone are both irrelevant, and the optimum is
effectively characterised by (A20) and (A22). Combining these by eliminating the
multipliers then gives a set of optimality conditions analogous to equation (7) that
applies for all decision dates τ:
(A23)

Etpt = – [l(1–rwh)/k](Etx*t – Etx*t-1)

22

References
Ball, L, N G Mankiw and D Romer (1988), ‘The New Keynesian economics and the
output-inflation tradeoff’, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1.
Batini, N and E Nelson (2000), ‘When the bubble bursts: monetary policy rules and
foreign exchange market behaviour’, mimeo, Bank of England.
Bean, C R (1998), ‘The new UK monetary arrangements: A view from the
literature’, Economic Journal, 108, pp.1795-1809.
Bernanke, B S and M Gertler (1999), ‘Monetary policy and asset volatility’ Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Review, 84(4), pp. 17-52.
Bernanke, B S and M Gertler (2001), ‘Should central banks respond to movements in
asset prices?’ American Economic Review, 91(2), pp. 253-257.
Bordo, M and O Jeanne (2002), ‘Boom-busts in asset prices, economic instability
and monetary policy’. Centre for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper 3398.
Borio, C and P Lowe (2002), “Asset prices, financial and monetary stability:
exploring the nexus”, mimeo, BIS, Basle.
Brainard, W (1967), ‘Uncertainty and the effectiveness of monetary policy’,
American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 57, pp. 411-25.
Calvo, G (1983), ‘Staggered prices in a utility maximizing framework’, Journal of
Monetary Economics, pp.383-98.
Cecchetti, S G, H Genberg, J Lipsky and S Wadhwani (2000), ‘Asset prices and
central bank policy’, Geneva Reports on the World Economy, 2, International Centre
for Monetary and Banking Studies and Centre for Economic Policy Research.
Cecchetti, S G, H Genberg and S Wadhwani (2002), ‘Asset prices in a flexible
inflation targeting framework’, in Asset Price Bubbles: The Implications for
Monetary, Regulatory and International Policies, (eds. W C Hunter, G G Kaufman
and M Pomerleano), MIT Press, pp.427-444.
Clarida, R, J Gali and M Gertler (1999), ‘The science of monetary policy: a new
Keynesian perspective’, Journal of Economic Literature, 37, pp. 1661-1707.
Clarida, R, J Gali and M Gertler (2001), ‘Optimal monetary policy in open versus
closed economies: an integrated approach’, American Economic Review, 91(2), pp.
248-252.
Crockett, A (2003), ‘International standard setting in financial supervision’, Institute
of Economic Affairs Lecture, Cass Business School, London, 5 February.
Gesell, S (1958), The Natural Economic Order, Peter Owen Ltd, London.

23

Giannoni, M P and M Woodford (2002), ‘Optimal interest rate rules: II applications’
mimeo, Princeton University.
Goodfriend, M (2002), ‘Interest rate policy should not react directly to asset prices’,
in Asset Price Bubbles: The Implications for Monetary, Regulatory and International
Policies, (eds. W. C. Hunter, G. G. Kaufman and M. Pomerleano), MIT Press,
pp.427-444.
Greenspan, A (2002), ‘Economic volatility’, speech at a symposium sponsored by the
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming.
Groth, C (2003), ‘Monetary policy and asset price fluctuations’, paper presented to
the European Economic Association Conference.
Gruen, D, M Plumb and A Stone (2003) ‘How should monetary policy respond to
asset-price bubbles?’, mimeo, Australian Treasury and Reserve Bank of Australia.
Kaminsky, G and C Reinhart (1999), ‘The twin crises: the causes of banking and
balance-of-payments problems’, American Economic Review, 89(3), pp.473-500.
King, M A (1997), ‘The inflation target five years on’, Bank of England Quarterly
Bulletin.
Kiyotaki, N and J H Moore (1997), ‘Credit cycles’, Journal of Political Economy,
105(2), pp.211-48.
Miller, M, P Weller and L Zhang (2002), ‘Moral Hazard and the US Stock Market:
Analysing the Greenspan Put’, Economic Journal, 112.
Rotemberg, J and M Woodford (1997), ‘An optimization-based econometric
framework for the evaluation of monetary policy’, NBER Macroeconomics Annual,
pp.297-345.
Stock, J H and M W Watson (2001), ‘Forecasting output and inflation: The role of
asset prices’ NBER Working Paper 8180.
Svensson, L (2001), ‘Requiem for forecast-based instrument rules’, mimeo, IIES,
Stockholm University.
Svensson, L (2002), ‘What is wrong with Taylor rules?’, Journal of Economic
Literature, forthcoming.
Svensson, L and M Woodford (1999),
inflation-forecast targeting’, mimeo.

‘Implementing optimal policy through

Taylor, J B (2001), ‘The role of the exchange rate in monetary-policy rules’,
American Economic Review, 91(2), pp. 263-267.
Woodford, M (1999), ‘Optimal monetary policy inertia’, NBER Working Paper
7261.

24

Yates, A (2003), ‘Monetary policy and the zero bound to nominal interest rates’,
Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 43(1), pp. 27-37.

25

Figure 1

UK Phillips Curve 1967-2002
GDP deflator

1967-1979
1980-1989
1990-2002

30
25
20
15
10
5
0
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Unemployment

US Phillips Curve 1967-2002

1967-1979
1980-1989
1990-2002

GDP deflator
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
0

2

4

6

8

Sources: IMF and OECD

26

10

12
14
Unemployment

Figure 2

Consumption to GDP ratio

Ratio
0.72
0.71
Constant prices

0.7
0.69
0.68
0.67
0.66
0.65
0.64

Current prices

0.63
0.62
ONS
1990 Source:1992

1994

1996

Source: ONS

27

1998

2000

2002

Figure 3

Household debt and mortgage equity withdrawal

8 Per cent of post-tax
Per cent of annual posttax income
7 income
6
5
4
Total debt (rhs)
3
2
1
0
MEW (lhs)
-1
-2
1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002

Sources: ONS, Bank of England.

28

130
125
120
115
110
105
100
95
90

Figure 4

House price to nominal consumption per household ratio and
house price to earnings ratio
Index: 1983Q1= 100

150
140

House price to earnings

130
120
110
100
90
80

House price to nominal consumption per
household

70
60

1983

1986

1989

1992

1995

1998

2001

Sources: Halifax, Office of the Deputy Prime Minister, ONS and Bank of
England

29

Figure 5

Index 1995 = 100

Terms of Trade

120

115

110

105

100

95

90
1980

1983
Source: ONS

1986

1989

1992

Source: ONS

30

1995

1998

2001

Figure 6
Ratio of dwellings to household (a)

(a) Figures for the stock of dwellings are for 31 December each year prior to 1991
and 31 March from 1991 onwards. That may account for most of the fall in the ratio
in 1991.
Source: Office of the Deputy Prime Minister.

31

Figure 7
Average financial assets, housing wealth and debt at
different levels of household indebtedness (2000)
£ thousands

Financial assets

200

Housing wealth

180

Total debt

160
140
120
100
80
60
40

75k+

65-75k

55-65k

45-55k

35-45k

25-35k

15-25k

10-15k

5-10k

1-5k

500-1000

1-500

0

20

Household total gross debt (£)

Sources: British Household Panel Survey, 2000, and Bank calculations

32

0

Figure 8

Distribution of total liabilities and liquid assets
across individual households

(a) The full BHPS survey for 2000 contains information on the total liabilities and the
liquid assets of more than 5,000 households. Households in the upper percentile of
either the liquid assets or the total liabilities distribution were removed. This Graph is
based on a random 10% sample of the remaining households, with each dot
representing one of those households.

Source: British Household Panel Survey, 2000.

33

