Back to the Future of Low Global Inflation
Speech given by
DeAnne Julius, Member of the Monetary Policy Committee

At the Maxwell Fry Global Finance Lecture, University of Birmingham
20 October 1999

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2

Back to the Future of Low Global Inflation

I am indeed honoured to be here to present the first of these Global Finance Lectures since the
renaming of the series after my great friend and colleague, Maxwell Fry. In fact, it was Max
who first contacted me with the invitation to speak here last January, and it was his infectious
enthusiasm that rapidly won me over to finding an appropriate space in an already crowded
diary. Subsequently I had the good fortune of collaborating with Max and several of his
colleagues at the Bank of England’s Centre for Central Banking Studies (CCBS) on a volume of
papers for our annual Central Bank Governors’ Symposium last June. Max has always been a
key figure in these Symposia. Even before he became Director of the CCBS, he was the
intellectual leader and instigator of the topics covered by the 50 plus central bank governors who
attended them. Topics ranged from the general (Central Banking in Developing Countries in
1995) to the practical (the role of central banks in helping governments meet their borrowing
requirements in 1996) to the technical (financial regulation in 1997; payments systems in 1998)
and, this year, to the esoteric (monetary policy frameworks in a global perspective, 1999). Max
has enjoyed ranging far and wide over his field, and he is uniquely capable of doing so. But he is
also great fun – and a great friend. The flip side of his intellectual curiosity is the warmth of his
personality. Many of the governors who attended those Symposia know him as a friend, as well
as an advisor. And it is that combination of lively intellect and personal warmth that makes him
so inspirational. He may not be here physically today, but he is very much here in our thoughts
and best wishes for him and his family this afternoon.

Max encouraged me, as you might expect, to use this speech to explore new ideas, to challenge
conventional wisdom. That’s not something that comes easily to a central banker, but then I’m
rather a recent convert to this profession, so perhaps I haven’t yet lost my knack! I did spend
several formative years, earlier in my career, using scenario planning techniques precisely to get
away from conventional thinking and to help private sector decision-makers ‘think the
unthinkable’ as we called it then. Conventional thinking can be deceptively dangerous when the
world is changing. In such times, clinging to old paradigms is at least as risky as embracing new

3
ones before their validity can be fully established. And my thesis today is that some elements of
the so-called ‘new paradigm’ growth theories are simply modern incarnations of the economic
trends of earlier era. Other elements clearly strain credulity: none of the arguments I am about
to develop could support the stock market valuations for internet companies in the US; nor do I
suggest that economic growth is about to accelerate dramatically. But if I am right that the
decades of the 1970s and 1980s were the exceptions rather than the norm, then we must
particularly guard against using the paradigms and parameters from those 20 years to shape our
views about the present period and our projections for the future.

In my current role as a member of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), I spend most of my
days thinking about the demand side of the economy. We model that using equations that have
been calibrated on data going back to the mid-70s or early 80s. Our assigned task on the MPC is
to deliver price stability. The Government has set our operational target for this as 2.5% annual
inflation on the Retail Price Index excluding mortgage interest payments (RPIX). To hit that
target we adjust interest rates in order to restrain or stimulate domestic demand whenever it
appears that total demand, looking 1-2 years ahead, is likely to exceed or fall short of the supply
capacity of the economy. Monetary policy can do very little to change the supply side. Our
lever pushes on demand and we generally take supply as given.

Today, however, I am going to step out of my usual central banker’s preoccupation with demand
and instead examine some of the longer-term changes that affect the supply side of our economy.
Some of these are international developments. Some relate to new technologies. Some stem
from changes in the labour market here in the UK. They share two characteristics. First, the
direction of their impact on UK inflation, at least over the medium-term, is downwards. But
second, the size of their impact will be very difficult to discern until many years hence. This is
because they are gradual, structural changes whose effect on economic statistics will be overlaid
with, and obscured by, the cyclical surges and slowdowns to which we devote so much time and
attention. In other words, if we place too much faith in econometric models calibrated from the
1970s and 1980s, we won’t know what’s hit us until it’s too late!

4
I’ll return to that point when I conclude with what this all means for the UK. But first, I’d like to
examine the key changes affecting inflation at the international level. My title, and my main
focus, is on low global inflation.

Global Inflation

First, the facts. Global inflation has been low in the 1990s relative to the 1970s and 1980s.
Figure 1 shows the inflation performance of three representative countries of the G7: the US, the
UK, and France. While inflation in the UK was worse than in the other two countries, all three
suffered from double-digit rates of price increases for several years during that period. Inflation
spikes coincided in the mid-70s and again in the early-80s. Britain and the US had smaller
inflation bursts in 1990. But since then inflation has been well below 5%, not only in these three
countries, but across the industrialised world and in most of the faster growing developing
countries.

Figure 1
Recent inflation performance
% p.a.

30
25

UK

20

France
15
10
5

US

0
1960

1970

1980

1990

This is largely explained by changes in the economic and policy environment in the 1990s.
Some say we have been lucky. Or, perhaps more accurately, we have not been so unlucky as
during the 1970s with the wars and revolutions in the Middle East that resulted in the 1973 and
1979 oil price spikes. Those reduced growth and increased inflation worldwide as central banks

5
reacted cautiously and, with hindsight, sometimes wrongly in response to those unfamiliar
supply-side shocks. Both companies and policy makers have learned from that experience.
Firms have shifted to energy-saving production processes, governments have increased taxes on
oil consumption to encourage conservation, and as a result, industrialised countries today are
much less dependent on oil than they were 20 years ago. These shifts are largely irreversible. In
1998 the oil price, in real terms, fell below the level it had been in the early 1970s prior to the
Arab-Israeli conflict. Yet oil consumption rose very little since the tax wedge paid by consumers
and the energy-saving technologies used by firms were unaffected. Similarly, the current surge
in crude oil prices, if it were to persist, would have much less effect on economic growth and
retail price inflation than did a similar rise in earlier decades. In the UK, for example, four-fifths
of the petrol price paid at the pump is actually tax. So if the price of crude oil doubles, the retail
price of petrol would rise by, at most, 15%.

There have also been clear shifts in the policy environment since the inflationary failures of the
1970s and 1980s. Many governments have institutionalised their commitment to price stability
with the creation of independent central banks. The UK is a prime, though certainly not the first,
example of this. Our Monetary Policy Committee has been given a clear inflation target and the
instrument independence to achieve it. Our decisions on interest rates are entirely unaffected by
the dates of political party conferences or upcoming elections. The same is true of the new
European Central Bank (ECB). Such independence has removed a possible inflationary bias
which some have blamed for the persistence of inflation during previous decades.

Thinking on fiscal policy has also evolved. In the US the budget deficits that grew out of
financing the Vietnam War and the later build-up of defense spending under President Reagan
have been tamed and turned into surpluses. Public antipathy towards deficit spending is strong
and support is growing for ‘investing’ surpluses in the social security fund for future retirement
benefits rather than reducing taxes or increasing current government expenditures. The result is
low or no government borrowing. This creates room in the financial markets for more private
sector borrowing and investment. At least in the US, the combination of a tight fiscal policy and
a relatively accommodating monetary policy is widely credited for the long economic upswing
of the 1990s.

6
In Europe fiscal deficits rather than surpluses are still the norm, but since the creation of the ECB
the relationship between fiscal and monetary policy has become more explicit. The Growth and
Stability Pact sets limits on member governments’ budget deficits and the financial markets react
nervously if it appears that those limits might be breached. Under the UK system as well, the
Government’s inflation target provides a clear fulcrum on which the balance of fiscal and
monetary policy rests. Interest rates are set to achieve the inflation target, taking into account the
Government’s announced fiscal plans. If those plans change significantly, and the inflation
target remains fixed, then the appropriate level of interest rates will also change. This
interdependence of fiscal and monetary policy is as well understood by the financial markets as it
is by the Treasury and the Bank of England. The decentralised decision-making that constitutes
the global financial marketplace is the ultimate ‘enforcer’ of fiscal prudence and monetary
discipline in all countries today. In that respect, it is the modern equivalent of the gold standard
and fixed exchange rates.

Though the 1990s may seem like a new era of price stability, a longer historical comparison
gives a different perspective. Before the late-1960s, low inflation was the norm rather than the
exception (Figure 2). It took World Wars or oil price shocks or – working in the opposite
direction - the Great Depression to knock inflation off course. Throughout most of the late 19th
century, price falls were common. This was not just because of the greater importance of
commodities then; price falls occurred for manufactured goods too.

7
Figure 2
Long term inflation performance
% p.a. 25
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
1870

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

The supply side changes in our economies today which are likely to affect inflation prospects
over the next decade are broadly similar to those at work during the 50 years that ended with the
first World War. Intensified international competition – what some call globalisation - and the
spread of new technologies may be thought of, not as elements of a new paradigm, but rather as
the current drivers towards the old norm of low global inflation. In my view, these two forces,
plus greater price transparency, are the key supply side changes that will affect global inflation
outcomes. Those countries that embrace these changes actively are likely to achieve a more
favourable inflation/growth combination than they managed during the 1970s and 1980s.
Whether this better combination is transitory – lasting only another 5-10 years – or more
permanent, will depend on whether these forces result in higher rates of productivity growth.
But either way, understanding their possible effect on the inflation outlook now and for the next
decade will be critical.

Let’s examine the three supply side changes in turn.

Globalisation

Globalisation, to an economist, means the increasing integration of global product markets. To a
businessman, it means global sourcing from the lowest cost suppliers worldwide, a global
investment strategy and global competition putting downward pressure on output prices in home

8
as well as host markets. To a consumer, it means global shopping with easy access to global
products and global brands, whether on the high street or via the phone, fax or internet.

Only the oldest and most traditional channels for globalisation - trade and foreign direct
investment (FDI) - are well captured in current statistics. The importance of trade, relative to
GDP, has been growing since the end of the war. For the world as a whole, the combined share
of imports and exports in GDP rose from around 20% in 1950 to nearly 40% in 1992 and has
risen further since (Figure 3). This reflects the success of GATT negotiations to remove trade
barriers over that period, the quality improvement and cost reductions in transport and
communication infrastructure, and the gains from specialisation as developing countries become
important producers and exporters of many manufactured goods.

Figure 3

World trade relative to GDP
%

50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990
Source: Penn World Tables

Interestingly, this trend has not been smooth, or always upward, suggesting that structural
changes – to the extent that they are linked to openness – tends to occur in waves. This is even
more apparent in the UK data where it is possible to look back further in history. Figure 4 shows
that the share of trade in UK GDP rose sharply between 1850 and 1920 from 34% to 64%. It
then fell back to a trough of 26% as a result of the great depression and World Wars, before
beginning the upwards march from 1950 shown on the previous global chart. But it was not until

9
the 1980s and 1990s that the UK trade share has approached its 1920 elevation. In terms of
globalisation through the trade channel, we have gone back to the future.

Figure 4

UK trade relative to GDP
Exports and imports % GDP 70
60
50
40
30
20
10
1830

1900

1950

1998

0

Source: Stein and National Accounts

The FDI channel is more exciting and, particularly for the service sector that now accounts for at
least two-thirds of output and jobs in most advanced economies, it is the more important vehicle
for global competition. If you are in the retailing business, for example, the way to reach foreign
customers is not through trade but through opening up shops in their cities. Often this is done
through the purchase of, or an investment partnership with, a domestic retail chain. The current
wave of merger and acquisition activity – not only in retailing, but also in insurance, banking,
telecommunications and other major service industries - is bringing international cost cutting
techniques and serious price competition directly into large parts of the economy that were
formerly rather distant from such global pressures.

Last year the UK was the second largest recipient of inward investment, after the US, and one of
the most important outward investors worldwide. FDI inflows last year rose by $26 billion to
$63 billion - accounting for over a quarter of all direct investment into Europe (Figure 5).
Outflows rose by more, almost doubling to $114 billion, and moving close to US levels of $133
billion. British companies are clearly very active in reaching foreign markets through direct

10
investment, and global companies headquartered elsewhere are raising the competition stakes
here in Britain.

Figure 5

UK FDI flows
1985=100

600
500

Outflows
400
Inflows

300
200
100
0

1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998
Source: IMF Balance of Payments statistics

While the US and Britain lead the pack, globalisation through FDI has been one of the most
striking international trends of the 1990s. World FDI flows have increased sharply, rising over
three fold between 1990 and 1998. Figure 6 illustrates the increasing importance of this channel
for global integration: FDI flows have outpaced the 30% rise in world GDP and even the 65%
rise in world trade. By last year the total sales of inward investors in their host country markets
were worth $11 trillion, compared with total world exports of $7 trillion.

11
Figure 6
World GDP, trade and FDI
1990=100
FDI
Trade

GDP

380
330
280
230
180
130
80

1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998
Source: Datastream, IMF Balance of Payments statistics

Globalisation means different things to different people. It has many channels and its
measurement will never be precise. But there is little doubt that a renewed wave of globalisation
is underway which is spreading international competition into more sectors and engulfing
producers in more countries. This has two important effects on the way inflationary pressures
develop in any particular country. First, in a more integrated global economy, it is the world
output gap that matters for many prices, not domestic supply capacity. If there is spare world
capacity in goods or services that can be transmitted either actually or virtually across borders,
then their prices will remain low or even fall. And supply bottlenecks at the global level are
much less common than domestically, simply because of scale and the global availability of
underemployed labour. Secondly, aside from capacity and business cycle considerations, the
faster spread of best-practice management techniques and cost-reducing technologies through
FDI means that efficiency inside firms and productivity at the economy-wide level should also
increase.

New technologies

The current wave of innovation in information and communications technology (ICT) is the
second major supply side development in the global economy. The effect of these technologies –

12
which cover computing power, the development of the internet, satellite communication, fibre
optics and lasers – is to improve the speed, quality and accessibility of information flows at
negligible marginal cost.

ICT has a huge potential to increase the efficiency with which capital and labour are combined in
production. For many products ICT has already reduced design times, increased quality control,
and shrunk the need for precautionary stocks in the production chain. Improved information
flows enable firms to respond more efficiently to shifts in consumer preferences, and to
customise products and services to their needs. The speed and low cost of information transfer
has led to greater outsourcing by producers to the cheapest global supplier, spurring and
speeding the globalisation process. As Figure 7 shows, while it took 36 years to achieve 50
million users for radio, 13 years for TV, and 16 for PCs, for the internet it has taken fewer than
5!

Figure 7

Years to achieve 50 million users
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Broadcast
radio

Broadcast
TV

Personal Commercial
computers
internet

Source: US Commerce Dept

The internet puts ICT directly at the service of the consumer. As shoppers we can now compare
the prices of standard goods and services online and either bypass the middleman and buy them

13
directly or use that information to extract discounts from our local supplier. While my own
forays into electronic shopping are so far limited to books, airline tickets and used cars, the price
reductions achieved on those items have certainly whetted my appetite for more! As both
consumers and search engines become more sophisticated, competitive pressures on prices and
distribution margins will intensify and affect many more items in the Retail Price Index.

Unfortunately statisticians are lagging behind in measuring these new purchasing patterns. No
country officially measures e-commerce in its national accounts yet, so estimates tend to be
based on private surveys which may not be representative. With that caveat in mind, in the US
e-commerce is estimated to be worth around $35 bn or 0.4% of GDP. 1 In the UK, BRMB
Internet Monitor recently reported that £2 billion was spent online in the past 12 months which
was a tenfold increase from a year ago. In just six months the number of people using the
internet for shopping rose by one-third to 2.5 million and now represents about a quarter of UK
internet users. Verdict Research estimates that online shopping in the UK will rise to 2.5% of
retail spending in the next three years. Others have made higher forecasts. If US patterns of
internet penetration and use are followed here with a lag then e-commerce would reach 4% of
GDP by 2002.

This is likely to intensify the downward pressures on retail margins, especially for goods which
are easy to compare such as books. More than 2% of all books sold in Britain are already sold
online. Prices are said to be 10-50% below those in retail outlets. Capturing such transactions
and prices in the official statistics will become increasingly important. The recent statement
from the Office of National Statistics that it is examining how it can include online shopping in
the Retail Price Index is to be welcomed.

But the biggest impact of e-commerce will probably come through its effect on the ability of
firms to reduce costs through outsourcing and more efficient supplier relationships. Currently,
four-fifths of e-commerce is business-to-business use rather than business-to-consumer, and this
share is expected to remain stable as internet usage rises. Again the US appears to be moving

1

“e-commere @ it best”, September 1999, Report by Performance and Innovation Unit (PIU), Cabinet Office.

14
faster than Europe. A recent study by Andersen Consulting found 77% of US senior executives
agreeing that e-commerce is “a significant part of the way we currently operate” while only 39%
of European executives said so. But these percentages are growing rapidly. As Figure 7
showed, internet use is spreading much faster than previous ICT innovations.

The effects are likely to be seen first on prices and margins, and then on productivity. Of this
trio, only prices are measured in a reasonably accurate and timely way. Margins are estimated
from input and output price series but do not take proper account of capital and labour inputs.
Productivity is estimated indirectly from output and employment data, where the former is
subject to large revisions years after it is first published. A recent staff research paper from the
US Federal Reserve Board showed how monetary policy mistakes of the 1960s and 1970s “could
be attributed in large part to changes in the trend growth of productivity in the economy which,
though clearly seen in the data with the benefit of hindsight, was virtually impossible to ascertain
in real-time.” (Orphanides, 1999). 2 Our successors at the Bank of England could be saying the
same thing about us in ten years time if we rely too heavily on current productivity estimates
when we have reason to believe that historical trends may be changing.

Price transparency

The third structural change exerting downward pressure on inflation, relative to the 1970s and
1980s, is increased price transparency. Part of this is interwoven with the rise of ICT and
internet shopping as just described. But there are two other contributing factors. The first is low
inflation itself. Stable prices overall make it easier for consumers to spot relative price increases
by removing the background confusion of high and variable general inflation. It is also harder
for producers to move off their ‘price points’ even when their costs are rising. The Bank of
England’s regional agents report ubiquitous anecdotes from their business contacts about
consumers becoming more price-conscious. “They look, they have money in their pockets, but
they don’t buy unless they think it’s a bargain.” Even in the banking sector, low nominal interest
rates have meant more shopping around by savers and more complaints by consumer groups
2

Athanasios Orphanides, “The Quest for Prosperity Without Inflation”, Staff paper, Federal Board of Governors,
May 1999.

15
about the margins between banks’ lending and savings rates. Margins of two or three percent are
much more noticeable when official rates are five or six percent than when they were fifteen
percent.

Price transparency in Europe is also being increased by the introduction of the euro. This will
become even more apparent to consumers when euro-denominated notes and coins replace
national currencies in just over two years time. Then it will become even easier to compare
prices and make purchases in neighbouring countries. For companies, the removal of foreign
exchange risk in dealing with purchasers and suppliers in other Eurozone countries has been
widely anticipated. It is beginning to feed through into increased merger activity, although it is
impossible to say how much of that is driven by the euro and how much by cyclical and other
factors. There are already a few instances reported of contracts negotiated in euros even where
one party is outside the eurozone e.g. BMW with Rover suppliers in Britain. Whether Britain is
in or out in the future, the consolidation of 15% of world GDP into a single currency brings
greater price transparency to a large share of its market.

To summarise so far, there are three powerful and partly interconnected trends in the world
economy at the turn of the century that can be expected to exert downward on prices from the
supply side: intensified globalisation; the rapid diffusion of ICT; and greater price transparency
due in part to the introduction of the internet and the euro. These certainly will not remove the
necessity for monetary policy makers to remain alert for signs of inflation and to raise interest
rates whenever it appears that prospective demand growth is excessive, in relation to prospective
supply. But they do imply that prospective supply will be more difficult to estimate from
historical relationships, and that domestic price setting behaviour will be more constrained than
in recent decades by international competitive forces. Monetary policy can only influence
nominal demand growth. The split of nominal growth between output and prices is determined
by the bargaining outcomes between buyers and sellers, and employers and employees
throughout the economy. If global competitive forces bear down on domestic prices more
strongly, then in the short-to-medium term domestic inflation will be lower and output growth
higher. If those same forces drive improvements in domestic productivity, then a more
permanent shift can be made to a higher growth path consistent with low and stable inflation.

16

Let’s turn now to the UK. We live in an open economy, with a higher than average share of
trade in GDP, where the absolute level of inward investment last year was second only to the US,
and where internet use by business ranks seventh in the world. 3 On top of that, our exchange rate
has been rather strong, at least against the euro and its constituent currencies, for the past three
years. We should be feeling the chills of these global competitive winds more than most. What
evidence is there that they are having an effect, first, on our prices and, second, on our
sustainable rate of growth?

Retail prices in the UK

Recent UK economic performance has been impressive. Output has grown for 28 consecutive
quarters over this recovery, the longest sustained expansion since recent records began in 1955.
This has been accompanied by a fall in the unemployment rate to 4.2% on the claimant count
measure – its lowest rate for nearly 20 years - or 5.9% on the broader LFS measure. Since the
recovery began, output growth has averaged 3% per year while inflation has averaged just 2.8%
(Figure 8). Based on past experience, many economists would have predicted that such high
rates of growth and employment would generate high wage pressure and rising inflation. On the
contrary, inflation has been broadly stable over the 1990s and is currently below the
Government’s target at 2.1%. The so-called headline rate has fallen to 1.1% - its lowest rate
since 1963.

3

As measured by internet hosts per thousand inhabitants reported by the OECD Internet Software Consortium.

17
Figure 8
Real and nominal GDP split
25
20
15

% p.a.
Nominal
Real

10
5
0
-5
-10
1980 1983 1986 1989 1992 1995 1998

While the overall inflation rate is a product of monetary policy, trends in individual price
components can provide some insight into what lies behind this favourable split between growth
and inflation in recent years. The degree to which policy needs to be tightened in order to keep
inflation from rising depends on the strength of upward price pressure from wages and margins
when unemployment is low and the economy is growing rapidly. Offsetting these ‘bottom up’
cyclical pressures are the ‘top down’ structural forces from global competition, new technologies
and greater price transparency that have been discussed. If these downward structural pressures
are increasing, then they will limit or delay the rise in interest rates necessary to keep inflation
from rising when domestic demand is strong.

The relative importance of cyclical and structural factors in price setting is rarely clear cut, but
micro and survey evidence, to which we now turn, can help to establish whether particular prices
rise and fall with demand or exhibit longer-term, structural behaviour.

The obvious place to look for structural pressures on margins through international competition
is in the prices of goods that are both widely traded and traditionally purchased through retailers.
Three examples are apparent among the major categories that make up the RPIX. Household
goods, shown in Figure 8, exhibit a clear deflationary tendency since 1996 despite strong
demand growth in that category for much of that period. Textiles, clothing and footwear demand

18
has seen some major ups and downs over the past five years while prices have been flat or falling
(Figure 9). The picture for electrical goods is even more striking (Figure 10). Prices have been
falling over most of the 1990s, while demand has grown very strongly. Of course, part of the fall
in electrical goods prices is probably explained by technical progress, but this picture is also
consistent with an increase in global capacity in these sectors and competitive pressure on
retailers. Temporary factors such as sterling’s appreciation and the Asian crisis probably
accelerated these deflationary trends but they do not map cleanly onto them. And despite
strengthening domestic demand new retail competitors in these and other sectors such as food
may cause these price declines to accelerate.

Figure 9

Figure 10

Textiles, clothing & footwear

Household goods
% p.a.
Volumes

Prices
1993

1994

1995

1996

1997 1998 1999

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6

% p.a.
Volumes

10
8
6
4
2
0
-2

Prices

-4
1993 1994

1995

1996 1997 1998

1999

19
Figure 11
Electrical goods
% p.a.

25
20

Volumes

15
10
5
0
-5
Prices
-10
1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

There is also evidence from the CBI Survey of manufacturing firms on the weakening link
between domestic capacity utilisation and prices. Figure 12 shows the falling trend of expected
output prices since the mid-90s despite relatively high levels of capacity use at least between
1995 and 1998.

Figure 12
CBI capacity utilisation and prices
% balance
% of firms working
at full capacity

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
-10

Expected output
prices

-20
-30

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

A third source of evidence on this point comes from the September 1999 survey carried out at
the MPC’s request by the Bank’s regional agents, on the question of structural changes in

20
retailing. This is not a statistically robust national sample but rather a reasonably diverse
collection of information by those with in-depth knowledge of the respondents’ businesses. The
agents spoke with 102 firms covering retail goods and household services (such as insurance)
across the country (Figure 13). They asked about the extent of price discounting and the reasons
behind it. We were trying to gain an insight into whether those reasons were structural or
cyclical.

Figure 13

Sample coverage
Other goods

Foods

10%

7%

DIY
9%

Leisure

Clothing etc

25%

13%

Electrical
2%

Household services
8%

Mixed
26%

Confirming the picture in official statistics, the survey results showed that most of the pickup in
retail sales values over the past year had resulted from higher volumes, not higher prices. More
than half of all respondents reported larger or more frequent discounting over the past 12 months
compared to a year ago (Figure 14). Only 5% of the sample reported less discounting.
Discounting had increased particularly for food, cars and clothing.

21
Figure 14
Extent of price discounting
Lower discounts
5%

Same
Greater discounts

41%

54%

Around two-thirds of respondents cited either changes in consumer behaviour or new or existing
competition as reasons for greater discounting - in other words structural rather than cyclical
changes were responsible (Figure 15).

Figure 15
Reasons for discounting
Other
Regulatory changes

1% 4%

Low demand
20%

Consumer behaviour
21%

Excess stocks
14%

New competition

Lower costs

17%

4%

Existing competition
19%

New competitors were particularly referred to by leisure and DIY contacts – less so by food and
clothing retailers. However, the ‘Walmart effect’ is focussing minds in areas such as clothing,
because of their global buying power, and the internet is perceived as a growing influence
driving down prices. Retail pricing points are an integral feature of the market and resistance to

22
changing them is significant, especially as the customer wants to benchmark his/her bargain
against a known price. In sum, this survey showed discounting to be a widespread phenomenon
which is becoming an expected feature of the market, at least in sectors such as mixed retail,
food and clothing. This reflects perceptions that consumers are now accustomed to looking for
bargains, and retailers say this is unlikely to change.

On the prices front, then, there is considerable evidence in the UK to suggest that long-term
structural changes are bringing effective downward pressures to bear on prices and margins, even
during times of relatively robust demand and high domestic capacity utilisation.

Are these competitive pressures feeding through to a supply side improvement?

Unfortunately, the short answer to this question is ‘we won’t know until at least ten years hence.’
Productivity improvements take time to germinate and statisticians take even longer to confirm
them.
In the US some evidence of a productivity growth shift has begun to emerge. Since 1996, US
labour productivity has risen at an annual average rate of 2.0%, well above its average of 1.4%
since 1970. Moreover, this is more than appears to be explained by the growth of capital inputs
– total factor productivity has risen also. However, there is debate about the extent to which
higher productivity is concentrated in the computer sector where sharp price falls have boosted
output (Gordon, 1999 4 ).

In the UK, which is generally reckoned to be about three years behind the US in ICT penetration,
annual labour productivity growth has slowed since 1995, averaging around 1.5% compared with
a long run average of just above 2.0%. The MPC suggested in its May Inflation Report that this
slowdown may be partly explained by firms anticipating only a temporary slowdown in demand.
If so, this and other cyclical factors such as capacity utilisation, may be obscuring underlying
improvements in productivity. In fact, from productivity data itself it is difficult to discern either
structural or cyclical patterns (Figure 16).

4

Gordon, R.J., “Has the “New Economy” rendered the productivity slowdown obsolete?”, June, 1999.

23
Figure 16
US and UK labour productivity
Percentage change on a year earlier
8
UK

6
4
2
0
US

-2
-4

1976

1979

1982 1985

1988

1991

1994

1997

In any case, labour productivity provides only a partial explanation of trend growth. In a growth
accounting framework, real GDP growth can be decomposed into the growth of capital inputs,
labour inputs, and the efficiency with which these inputs are combined in production - or total
factor productivity growth. It is more useful to analyse these determinants over longer time
horizons when cyclical influences are less predominant.

Figure 17 shows a decomposition of UK growth by decade since 1963. It shows how growth
was affected by the oil shocks, falling from an annual average rate of almost 3% between
1963-70 to below 2% between 1971-80. Part of this fall is accounted for by capital inputs,
whose contribution to growth virtually halved between the 1960s and subsequent decades. There
was a sharp decline in productivity post-73 as well, but the slower growth of investment and the
capital stock mattered more. Shorter working hours and a stagnant labour force have meant that
the contribution of labour inputs has been negative in three out of the last four decades, with the
industrial stoppages of the 1970s particularly affecting that decade. Labour inputs have been an
important swing factor in delivering higher growth. During the 1980s higher employment and
hours worked made a positive contribution to growth, more than accounting for the increase in
growth rates over the 1970s. Demography and better industrial relations partly explain this, but
social and economic changes which increased female participation in the labour force were also
important.

24
Figure 17

Growth accounting
Contribution to GDP growth (%)

4
3
2
1
0
-1

1963-1970
Hours

1971-1980
Capital

1981-1990
TFP

1991-1998
GDP growth

Against this historical backdrop, it is interesting to analyse the growth patterns of the 1990s in
more detail (Figure 18). As the upswing gathered pace, both employment and total factor
productivity switched from making negative to positive contributions to growth. Employment
growth has continued over the decade as unemployment has fallen and, at least until very
recently, the rate of labour force participation has risen. There is scope for a further rise if
female participation rates continue to converge with those in the US and if government
programmes such as the New Deal and the Working Families Tax Credit succeed in drawing
more people into employment. Both prospects are made more likely by the current tightness in
the labour market as signalled by the low unemployment rate. Once in the labour force, those
formerly without a job gain experience that can make them more attractive to the next employer.
Such hysteresis effects mean that prolonged periods of low unemployment can gradually reduce
an economy’s natural rate of unemployment that is compatible with stable inflation. Only time
will tell if that is currently happening in Britain.

The other factor behind the UK’s growth performance during the 1990s has been the strong
increase in investment (Figure 18). Business investment has risen at an annual average of 6.8%
compared with a long run average since 1965 of 2.7%. It reached a record high in 1998 of 14%
of GDP, compared with a long run average of around 10%. We don’t know how much of this
increased investment has been in computers and related new technologies because no separate

25
estimates are available in the UK. But investment trends in the US and UK have been similar,
and we know that much of the growth in the US can be attributed to ICT investment. In the US,
there was a five-year lag between the rise in investment and the eventual rise in measured,
economy-wide productivity. If the UK were to follow that pattern, then evidence of an
improvement in productivity would begin to emerge next year. But recall my earlier chart
showing the huge year-to-year swings in measured productivity, both in the US and the UK.
Even if our recent investment patterns launch us into the Millennium at a higher rate of
productivity growth, we probably cannot confirm that for at least another decade.

Figure 18

Growth accounting
Contribution to GDP growth (%)

5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4

1990

1991
Hours

1992

1993

1994

Capital

1995

1996

TFP

1997

1998

GDP growth

Figure 19

UK business investment
% of GDP

15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8

1965 1969 1973 1977 1981 1985 1989 1993 1997

26
Implications for policy makers

To conclude, let me try to distil some practical advice for policy makers out of the picture of
change and inevitable uncertainty that I have been painting.

First, be sceptical of forecasts. They are necessarily built upon the behavioural relationship of
the past. Many of these will persist into the future. But in the case of global inflation, the 1970s
and 1980s were particularly unfortunate decades. Dependence on oil and the Middle East,
coupled with the abandonment of fixed exchange rate anchors, produced inflationary tendencies
in the global environment that policy makers of the time were slow to recognise. In other
decades, both past and present, the prevailing global forces have been mildly deflationary, driven
by declining production costs and expanding competition. This change in ‘wind direction’ is too
subtle, too pervasive and too recent for conventional forecasting models to incorporate.

Historically calibrated models of the UK are likely to pose particular risks in this regard because
of Britain’s exceptionally poor inflation performance during the 1970s and 1980s. In the
forecasting work we do at the Bank of England we try to take account of this by regularly
reviewing discrepancies between our equation forecasts and actual outturns, and then imposing
judgmental changes on the equations where we think they may be misleading us. We also try to
illustrate the high degree of uncertainty around our forecasts by presenting them as fan charts of
probability distributions rather than point estimates. But this does not address the bias that may
be present in the model itself, and there is still a tendency by commentators to focus on the
central forecast point at the two year horizon and use the difference between that and our point
target for inflation as the central guide to policy.

Second, listen and learn from real-time experience. If model-based forecasts are highly
uncertain and potentially misleading, then it is especially important to seek out complementary
sources of information and interpretations of economic developments from those actually in the
thick of the action. The Bank’s regional agents hold detailed discussions with business people
around the country to provide us with such feedback. In addition, I find that first-hand meetings
and visits often yield insights into puzzles in the data or provoke new ideas for our

27
econometricians to test back in London. The many membership surveys that are carried out by
organisations such as the CBI, the BCC, CIPS, EEF and so on also help to shed light on current
and future developments as revealed through orders and expectations. In changing times it pays
to be eclectic.

Third, pay special attention to prices. Economists are trained to think of prices as information
signals. They are sensitive indicators, revealing even small shifts in supply or demand. They are
readily observable, unlike output gaps, natural rates of unemployment or trend productivity. One
particular set of prices is also our inflation target, and every sportsman knows the value of
keeping a close eye on one’s target! But the lags between changes in interest rates and inflation
are such that we must also watch prices all along the supply chain. Input prices – from oil and
other commodities to wages and commercial rents – will eventually influence retail prices. This
‘bottom up’ view of pricing is incorporated into the Bank’s and most other forecasters’ models.
But output prices – and output price expectations – will also influence margins, and eventually
wages, rents and other negotiated input prices. In a world of stronger global competition and
more price transparency, one might expect such ‘top down’ price setting behaviour to become
more widespread. So as well as looking at model-based inflation forecasts, we should remember
that current prices, at all levels, remain our most accurate and timely barometers of inflationary
and deflationary pressures in the economy.

Fourth and finally, be pre-emptive, but delicately so. If one has reason to believe that the
economy is in a period of transition and that the global trends from the 70s and 80s no longer
provide a confident grounding for forecasts, then one needs to tread carefully. It is still right,
given transmission lags, to move interest rates before inflation deviates significantly from target.
But we must recognise that firms and households are learning new behavioural patterns in
response to the new technologies and competitive pressures facing them. Aggressive patterns of
policy change, or activist attempts to fine-tune the future, carry particular risks during such
junctures.

This is not a new insight in response to a new paradigm. It is another example of applying the
lessons of the past. The paper by Orphanides to which I referred earlier concluded, after his

28
examination of the policy mistakes in the US that led to what he calls the Great Inflation of the
1970s:

“Fundamentally, it may matter not so much whether policy is driven by rule versus
discretion but whether policy reflects prudence versus overconfidence. This indicates the
profound importance of appreciating the information problem for successful policy
design…Activist discretionary policy as well as activist rules will fail to deliver on their
promise when they are based on a false presumption of confidence about the policymaker’s
understanding of the economy” (Orphanides, 1999)
To avoid the policy mistakes of the past, one should be open-minded about the paradigms – new
or old – that will shape our future.

