Speech given by
Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England

At CBI North East Annual Dinner, Gateshead
11 October 2005

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2

Over the past half century the UK economy has been almost as volatile as the sporting
fortunes of the North East. In my first speech as Governor, two years ago, I talked about
the "nice" decade – a period of non-inflationary consistently expansionary economic
growth. Following the Great Inflation of the 1970s and 1980s, the performance of the
UK economy since 1992 might be characterised as the Great Stability. Inflation and
output growth have been more stable than in any decade since the Second World War.
So it is not surprising that the view has gained ground that the economy can grow at a
constant rate every single quarter, and that it is the job of the Bank of England to ensure
that it does.
Such a view is not supported by the lessons of economic history. The business cycle has
not been abolished, although monetary policy can affect its amplitude. There are two
main reasons for rejecting the view that the Bank can and should control the short-run
path of output.
First, developments, often outside the UK economy and whose consequences are rarely
evident at the time, can produce large shocks to total demand. Since there are lags
between changes in interest rates and their impact on spending and ultimately inflation, it
is usually not possible for monetary policy to offset those shocks in the short term. And
we rarely have accurate information on spending until several months and often years
later. Hence there will always be some volatility in the economy when demand changes
in an unforeseen way – whether consumer spending, business investment or other
components of demand.
The second and less widely appreciated reason is that the growth rate of potential supply
is itself changing over time. The economy’s potential to produce goods and services
depends on the availability of labour and capital equipment and our ability to use them
efficiently, none of which evolves steadily. For example, migrant labour from Eastern
Europe has doubled the growth of labour supply in the United Kingdom over the past
couple of years. And the IT revolution not only changed the technology used in almost
every business operation; it also lowered the price of new capital goods, leading to
increased rates of capital accumulation. Technology advances over time but not at a
steady pace. Innovations are unpredictable and take time to enter business processes.

3
And, as anyone who has invested in computers will know, it takes even longer to work
out how to exploit them most effectively. So potential supply grows at a variable rate,
and there is nothing that monetary policy can or should do to change that.
Uncertainty about the rates at which both demand and supply are growing poses two
questions – the first long term and the second more immediate.
The long-term question is clear – will the Great Stability continue? Will the next ten
years be as nice as the past ten? That seems rather unlikely. As I said two years ago in
Leicester: “The strategy which the Monetary Policy Committee has pursued in recent
years – stimulating domestic demand to compensate for weak external demand in the face
of a strong exchange rate – carries the risk that there could be a sharp correction to the
level of consumer spending at some point in the future.” That risk has, at least in part,
crystallised. Some of the influences that have in the past provided a boost to consumer
spending may be going in to reverse.
Over the past decade the integration of China, India and other emerging markets in Asia
into the world trading system has lowered the prices of clothes, electrical goods and other
items that we import from them. The terms on which we trade with the rest of the world
improved. That provided a boost to real disposable incomes and so to consumer
spending. But the rapid growth of China and India also meant sharp increases in the
prices of many commodities, such as copper, aluminium, iron ore and, particularly
important, oil. In that sense the rises in oil prices over the past two years are very
different from the oil price “shocks” of the 1970s. They reflect rapid growth in the
demand for oil – faster than the growth of capacity – rather than an OPEC-inspired
contraction of supply. What we have seen is not so much an “oil shock” but a
consequence of the rise of China.
The lower prices for many consumer goods and the higher cost of oil are both the result
of globalisation. Having benefited from the former we are now experiencing the latter.
As a result, our import prices are no longer falling as rapidly as they were, and, indeed,
over the past year even the prices of non-oil imports have risen. With the additional
impact of higher oil prices, real disposable incomes are rising more slowly, and the long-

4
awaited rebalancing of the economy away from consumer spending to business
investment and net exports is underway.
Moreover, the higher oil prices may reduce the growth of the supply capacity of the
economy. So it is likely that in future the shocks to both demand and potential output
will be more challenging for monetary policy than during the Great Stability. Both
inflation and output may be somewhat more volatile than the calm waters to which we
had become accustomed. And the MPC can do little to change that. Expectations of its
ability to stabilise the economy must be realistic.
The immediate question for the MPC is how to respond to the rebalancing of the
economy and the rise in oil prices. Over the past year the economy, led by consumer
spending, has slowed sharply. At the same time inflation – on our target CPI measure –
has moved above the 2% target. It has now reached 2.4%. Only a year ago it was 1.1%.
The MPC has been surprised by both the slowdown and the rate at which inflation has
picked up.
So why has inflation picked up? One reason, of course, is the direct impact of higher oil
prices on the cost of petrol and heating and the indirect effect on the cost of producing
goods and services that use oil as an input. No more than one half of the pick-up in
inflation can be explained by oil prices. Other factors are at work, such as the pressure of
demand on capacity over the past two years. And more and more spending is on services.
The proportion of expenditure in the basket used to calculate the CPI accounted for by
services – especially health, education and financial services – has risen from 36% in
1997 to over 46% this year. Since inflation of services is higher than that of goods it is
not surprising that CPI inflation has risen as the share of spending on services has itself
risen. Interestingly, the increase in the share of services is much less evident in the
basket for the RPIX measure of inflation – from 38% to 41% over the same period.
Higher oil prices affect not just current inflation but also both demand and potential
supply and hence future inflation. They mean a shift in spending power from oil
consumers to oil producers. The purchasing power of wages and salaries must grow
more slowly than would otherwise have been possible, by around 1-2% in the major
industrialised countries, spread over a couple of years.

5

The adverse effect of the rise in the oil price on consumers’ purchasing power cannot be
avoided. Inflation will for a short while be above target. But attempts to claw back lost
purchasing power by bidding up money wages would simply result in higher
unemployment as the MPC acted to keep inflation in line with the target looking further
ahead. It is reassuring that so far earnings growth has remained stable.
As consumption slows, some of the impact of higher oil prices on overall demand will be
mitigated as the beneficiaries of higher oil prices – the oil-producing countries and the oil
companies and their owners – increase their spending. And the pressure on government
finances will be eased somewhat by higher oil revenues. But it is likely that this
rebalancing of the composition of demand will mean some volatility of total demand.
Moreover, as long as firms struggle to find effective substitutes for oil, a rise in its price
will make it more costly to employ capital equipment that uses oil. Some machinery may
even be scrapped, reducing the effective stock of capital equipment. The fall in the real
purchasing power of wages and salaries may lower labour supply. Together these effects
reduce the growth of the supply capacity of the economy, although how important they
are is unclear. Monetary policy, though, cannot offset movements in potential supply.
But what it can and should do is examine all the evidence on the balance between
demand and potential supply, and how this affects the outlook for inflation. That is what
the Committee will be doing as it prepares its next Inflation Report.
The problem of where to set interest rates is compounded by uncertainty about the recent
levels of demand and potential output. The extent of the slowdown is unclear, with
mixed messages from official output data, business surveys and data on the labour
market. So there is uncertainty about the rate of spending in recent quarters, let alone
where it is likely to go in the near future. And there is uncertainty too over potential
output, and hence the degree of slack in the economy. Will labour migration continue at
recent rapid rates, or will the softening of the labour market lead to a fall in migration?
How far will higher oil prices lower potential supply? Those are the questions which the
MPC must try to answer, but we do so recognising that it would be unwise to place too
much weight on any one estimate of the amount of slack in the economy. All central
banks are struggling with the same problems, not just the Bank of England but the

6
Federal Reserve too. As one of its Governors, Don Kohn, pointed out only two weeks
ago, “policymakers should be cautious about responding aggressively to estimated
movements in economic slack”. But most important of all is the need to keep an open
mind on the future path of interest rates.
There has grown up in recent years a false sense of our ability to maintain a smooth and
steady growth rate of output. So it is important to understand what monetary policy can
do and what it cannot. I noted earlier that, in the past, the sporting fortunes of the North
East were as volatile as those of the UK economy. What of the future? About the
former, I suggest we wait to hear from Rob Andrew. For the UK economy, monetary
policy cannot ensure that output will grow at a constant rate. But in the medium term it
can deliver low and stable inflation. In that way, it provides a platform for you – and
businesses throughout the country – to make the long-term decisions that are the source
of our prosperity.

