Panel discussion on ‘Challenges for the Future’
Remarks by
Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England

Federal Reserve Board Conference ‘Central Banking: Before, During and After the Crisis’
At the Madison Hotel, Washington, USA
24 March 2012

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

The dinner last night we shall all remember for a long time. We were fortunate enough to hear three Fed
Chairmen – each of them a giant in his own way – and a reply from Don Kohn that was not only insightful
and thoughtful, but moving too.

Tributes are one thing, but the Bank of England puts its money where its mouth is. Alan Greenspan
originally loaned Don Kohn to the Bank, as we couldn’t afford the transfer fee. But as soon as Don was out
of contract we swooped to sign him for our new Financial Policy Committee (FPC). The respect and
affection in which Don is held at the Bank of England is demonstrated by the presence here of three of us
from the Bank.

So what lessons have Don and we at the Bank drawn from the crisis? Let me relate these to the three topics
of the conference – monetary policy, liquidity provision and macro-prudential policy, three of the core
functions of central banks. The financial crisis has brought these core functions closer together, highlighting
the complementarities as well as blurring the lines between them. The separation of monetary from financial
stability policies no longer seems so clear cut, and this new world presents central banks with many
challenges.

Monetary Policy

The challenge for monetary policy can most easily be put as follows. Before the financial crisis output growth
was around trend in the industrialised world, inflation was low and stable, and yet the balance sheet of the
banking sector, and so broad money, expanded at a destabilising pace.

In the UK growth averaged 2.9% in the five years to 2007, only marginally above the average growth rate
from 1950 to 2002.1 Nor is there evidence of an output boom in other advanced economies. The IMF
estimates of the output gap for the UK, Japan and the US were all small, and that for the euro area saw only
a short-lived pick-up in 2006-7. Consistent with the steady growth of output, inflation was low and
stable: indeed UK inflation did not stray more than one percentage point from target for nearly 15 years until
March 2007.

Yet we saw persistent global imbalances and a build up of leverage that led to the financial crisis. In the UK,
the largest banks’ balance sheets grew by an average of nearly 25% a year from 2002 to 2007. UK banks
tripled in size in that time. The pace of growth was only a little less frantic in the euro area, where the largest
banks’ assets grew by 18% a year. The largest US banks grew by less – but the shadow banking sector was
a much more important part of the story there.

1

Methodological changes to the official UK GDP data that were implemented in the 2011‘Blue Book’ have not yet been applied to the
official data before 1997. Therefore, for the purpose of this comparison, an adjustment has been made to pre-1997 data.
2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

2

The question is, to what extent should monetary policy be set explicitly with a view not only to medium-term
output and inflation, but also to mitigating slow-burn financial stability risks? That is a challenge to the
intellectual foundations of monetary policy. One natural response is to look to macro-prudential policy to
provide an extra instrument or set of instruments to tackle financial stability risks. I shall return to the
challenges for macro-prudential policy later, after saying a few words about liquidity provision.

Liquidity provision

The provision of liquidity to banks remains at the heart of a central bank’s role. Market operations have had
to evolve during the crisis both to accommodate different types of monetary policy – such as asset
purchases financed by central bank reserves – and to respond to the heightened liquidity needs of the
banking sector in times of crisis. Indeed, emergency liquidity support was a crucial factor in averting a
banking sector collapse, and the awful consequences that would have ensued. The evidence of these
changes can be seen in the huge expansion in central bank balance sheets since the summer of 2007. As
Jean-Claude Trichet mentioned earlier, the Bank of England, Fed and ECB all expanded their balance
sheets in broadly the same way.

The danger of emergency liquidity provision is that it risks creating the expectation that it will always be
available. That sets bad incentives for banks, and encourages excessive maturity transformation. We need
a regulatory framework that provides the right incentives. International efforts to design such a liquidity
regime are underway: but liquidity regulation remains a hugely challenging area. A central difficulty is in
defining what constitutes a liquid asset. We have seen in the financial crisis that what might seem a liquid
asset at one point in time, may quickly cease to be so under different circumstances. That leads one to the
position that the only truly liquid assets are central bank reserves, or assets that can reliably be converted
into reserves.

The financial crisis also reminded us that liquidity can at best provide only temporary relief – it cannot
substitute for the painful restructuring that is necessary to tackle solvency problems. It is better to avoid
such difficulties in the first place, and macro-prudential policy has a big part to play in meeting that aspiration.

Macro-prudential Policy

There are significant challenges to overcome if macro-prudential policy is to live up to its promise. In the UK
we have begun to operationalise macro-prudential policy through the Bank of England’s Financial Policy
Committee. Let me briefly explain something about the FPC, who serves on the Committee, and what we
have been doing.

Set up last year, the Committee comprises eleven voting members: five from within the Bank, two from the
micro-prudential regulator, and four external members. Among those external experts our very first signing
3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

3

was the person we are celebrating today, Don Kohn. I hope this is the start of a true transfer market in
central bankers.

Our remit from the Government – which is yet to be enacted in legislation – charges us with taking action to
remove or reduce risks which could threaten the resilience of the financial system. The FPC expects to gain
statutory powers in early spring of next year. But we have been up and running since June last year, and
have in the interim made policy recommendations aimed among other things at improving the resilience of
the banking sector and improving disclosure of information to markets. Drawing on our experience so far, I
would like to remark on three of the challenges we have faced in beginning to make macro-prudential policy
a reality.

The first has been to work out what instruments the FPC is going to use to meet its objectives. In the new
architecture, which will come into effect in 2013, it is envisaged that the FPC will have the power first to direct
the prudential and financial conduct regulatory bodies to take actions; second to recommend that those
bodies take actions on a comply-or-explain basis; and third to make recommendations to other bodies.

One of our early tasks has been to set out to the Government our views on the instruments over which we
would have statutory power to direct the prudential and financial conduct regulatory bodies. We have been
busy thinking about this for the past few months, and yesterday we published our advice to the Chancellor of
the Exchequer. The Committee settled on a narrow set, comprising – for now – three instruments.
o

The first of these is a countercyclical capital buffer to be part of a bank’s capital requirement.
This has the advantage that it is embedded in the Basel III international regulatory programme.
It provides a simple aggregate tool that could play a role in mitigating excessive credit growth
during upswings, while increasing the capacity of the system to absorb losses in the downswing.
It will at times be important that banks meet required increases in capital ratios by raising capital
rather than through potentially damaging reductions in assets. Indeed, this is a live issue for the
FPC, reinforcing the point that it is important not only to be able to alter capital requirements, but
also to be able to influence how those capital requirements are met.

o

The second is the power to vary financial institutions’ capital requirements against exposures to
specific sectors. In practice that means scaling up the amount of capital that must be held
against certain types of exposures. That makes it possible to take a more targeted approach to
dealing with pockets of risk, for example in commercial or residential property. But there is a risk
of mistaking symptoms for causes.

o

The third instrument is a leverage ratio – that is, a maximum ratio of total liabilities to capital.
This has the overwhelming benefit of simplicity and transparency, and provides a (time-varying)
backstop to capital ratios that rely on risk-weighted assets. I myself attach great importance to a
leverage ratio because of the impossibility of constructing risk weights that can anticipate major
swings in sentiment, as we have seen recently with sovereign debt.

4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

4

Of course there are many other potential instruments, and in several cases, the FPC recognised the potential
effectiveness of these, but had reservations about their immediate practicability. For example, a good case
can be made for an instrument that would tackle the build-up of liquidity risk. But it makes sense to wait to
see what international micro-prudential standards are agreed before proceeding. The same can be said of
the ability to vary the terms of collateralised transactions by financial institutions. In some cases a margining
requirement could be useful to target risks in shadow banking or financing markets as we discussed this
morning. But again, it makes sense to wait for international agreement. Margining requirements will work
better as part of an international regime.

We also recognised the potential usefulness of being able to vary mortgage terms and conditions, for
example via loan to income or loan to value ratios. But such actions go further than discouraging particular
types of lending. They limit the amount that any individual or business can borrow. That might better be left
to the lenders to decide within an overall policy of making such lending more costly. So we concluded that
further public debate was needed before those instruments could be requested by the FPC.

We will be expected to report on the use of our direction powers on a very regular basis. But there are other
areas, such as market structures or disclosure requirements, where the FPC will wish to make important, but
infrequent, interventions. So it is important not to forget that the FPC will be able to issue ‘comply or explain’
recommendations to regulators.

This is not the final word. Risks to financial stability will change over time, in a way that we cannot hope to
predict. We will learn from our own and others’ experience about the effectiveness of different
instruments; and we will have to be ready to react and adapt to financial innovation. An important principle is
that the FPC will keep under review the regulatory perimeter, and the instruments in its toolkit. It is important
that provision is made for new tools to be added quickly when required.

A second challenge facing the UK FPC is in determining how macro-prudential policy interacts with the other
branches of regulation and policy – in particular the micro-prudential regulator and monetary policy.

Macro-prudential and micro-prudential policies clearly share a common interest, but the dividing line is
blurred, and at times the opinions of the two sets of policy-makers are bound to differ. So there is question
about how this can be managed. Fortunately the institutional arrangements in the UK take care of that, to a
large extent. In general macro-prudential policy is about laying down rules for how the micro-prudential
regulator should go about its task. It can provide an important underpinning and help to ensure consistency
across regulated institutions.

I have already noted that a challenge for monetary policy is the extent to which it should seek to play a role in
financial stability. That goes to the heart of the question of how monetary and macro-prudential policies
should interact. There are clear overlaps between the two policies, since they work through some of the
5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

5

same channels. But, for a central bank pursuing monetary and financial stability, the addition of
macro-prudential instruments reduces the extent to which the two objectives must be traded off. The two
policies may at times act in different directions – one tightening, one loosening – and some people worry that
this is problematic. In fact though, this is an indication that the second instrument is performing a useful
function.

That raises a question about whether monetary policy and financial stability policy decisions should be taken
by the same group of people. In the UK the significant cross-membership of the Monetary Policy and
Financial Policy Committees means that this coordination issue is of secondary importance. The more
fundamental points are (i) to recognise the need for macro-prudential policy instruments; and (ii) to recognise
that having macro-prudential tools does not preclude monetary policy from playing a role in financial stability.
There may be times when the comparative bluntness but broad scope of interest rates is a positive
advantage.

The final challenge for macro-prudential policy is a longer term one, going beyond the immediate issues of
setting up the apparatus. That is to maintain over long periods of time the independence and legitimacy that
macro-prudential policy needs to do its job effectively. That means winning the battle of hearts and minds.

The FPC is charged with taking decisions that are necessary, but which may be unpopular at times,
especially with the financial sector. In the Bank of England we now have two powerful policymaking
bodies: one to take away the punchbowl as the party is getting going, and the other to turn the music down!
If we are to maintain the ability to act independently and take unpopular decisions, it will be crucial to explain
what we are doing and why. Setting realistic expectations for what can be achieved is an important
objective. And, since these new policy instruments are to be wielded by unelected officials, the
accountability arrangements need careful thought.

The financial crisis represents a great opportunity to make changes to the financial system and the way we
regulate it. Capturing the lessons learned now, while they are fresh in our minds, is of vital importance. That
is why we are so grateful to have the benefit of Don’s wisdom and experience contributing to the FPC in the
UK. Looking ahead, our best hope of making lasting changes to the financial system, and capturing the
lessons learned from the crisis in an enduring way, is to build that knowledge into institutions in whose
memory it remains long after the people involved have left the scene.

6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

6

