Speech given by
Charles Bean, Executive Director and Chief Economist of the Bank of England

At the Colchester Town Partnership Annual Dinner, Moot Hall, Colchester
25 November 2004

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Good evening! I understand that the Queen has also been in Colchester today. That
continues a royal connection that dates back to at least 43AD when eleven British
kings surrendered here to the Emperor Claudius – after, it should be said, he had first
granted them enormous loans. Seventeen years later the Romans foreclosed on those
loans, triggering Boadicea’s rebellion in the process. Moreover, the Romans were so
confident of their hold on East Anglia that at the time of the rebellion they had only
200 soldiers posted here – no match at all for the thousands of bloodthirsty Iceni who
descended on them. Perhaps there is a lesson here for the bankers in the audience. In
any case, it is certainly a reminder that policymakers should always plan for the
unexpected. And it is to some of the uncertainties in the economic environment that I
shall address my remarks tonight.
On the face of it, the economic outlook appears quite benign. In our latest Inflation
Report, published a fortnight ago, the Monetary Policy Committee’s central projection
is for GDP growth to remain near trend over the next two to three years, with
decelerating household and public spending offset by stronger external demand and a
continuation of the recent recovery in investment. That is a rather better balanced
picture than of late. CPI inflation is currently just 1.2%, but under our central
projection is set to move up next year towards the Chancellor’s 2% target, reflecting
the pressure of demand on capacity and higher prices for oil and other inputs working
their way along the supply chain.
But, as the Romans in 60AD failed to recognise, the chances of everything working
out exactly as expected are remote, and tonight I want to discuss just three of the
many uncertainties that cloud the current outlook. The first relates to the evolution of
global current account imbalances and the associated implications for exchange rates.
The US current account deficit has increased steadily since the early 1990s and
presently exceeds 5% of GDP. For much of the late 1990s, that deficit was associated
with high rates of investment prompted by a pickup in US productivity growth and
profitability driven by the revolution in information technology. And private investors
overseas were willing to acquire extra holdings of US corporate assets as a
counterpart. But, more recently, the current account deficit has been associated with
lower savings by US households and a large public sector deficit there. And the
counterpart has been an accumulation of public sector debt, particularly by Asian
central banks seeking to keep their currencies competitive against the dollar.
2

The present situation could be maintained for a while yet, but overseas investors are
unlikely to continue accumulating dollar assets at the current rate indefinitely.
Moreover, at some stage action will have to be taken to close the US fiscal deficit and,
when that happens, the real value of the dollar will need to fall if a sharp slowdown is
to be avoided there. In the mid-1980s, the elimination of the twin US fiscal and
current account deficits – then around 3% of GDP – was accompanied by a fall of
around 30% in the real trade-weighted value of the dollar. To date, the real tradeweighted value of the dollar has only fallen 15% since its peak in February 2002, so a
further – possibly substantial – decline may accompany closure of the current account
deficit.
But the timing and nature of this adjustment is very hard to predict. And the
implications for UK prospects depend critically on what then happens to demand in
our major export markets and, especially, the impact on sterling. Since 1997, when
the pound has risen against the dollar, it has often also fallen against the euro, and
vice versa. Consequently the trade-weighted value of the pound has been relatively
stable, despite very large swings in the exchange rate of the dollar against the euro. If
that pattern is maintained, then the deterioration in overall UK competitiveness from
further dollar depreciation would be limited. But there can be no guarantee that this
pattern of “sterling-in-the-middle” will continue.
My second uncertainty relates to the prospects for domestic demand. During the
global slowdown that marked the early years of this millennium, growth in the United
Kingdom was sustained by robust household and public spending. But, as external
demand and investment have started to recover, so it has been necessary for the MPC
to moderate the growth in consumer spending a touch in order to maintain total
demand in line with supply and thereby keep inflation on track to meet the target.
Despite last week’s announcement of a 0.4% fall in retail sales in October, our central
projection is for consumer spending to continue to grow steadily over the next few
quarters, albeit at a lower rate than seen in recent years. But with housing market
activity and house price inflation slowing, is there a danger of a sharper slowdown in
spending growth?

3

It should be stressed that there are considerable uncertainties about both the path of
house prices and their impact on consumer spending. An average house today costs
about six times average annual earnings, whereas the historical multiple is somewhat
below four. Now there are good reasons why house prices should have risen relative
to earnings. The transition to a low inflation, low interest rate environment has shifted
the real burden of repayments for a typical mortgage into the future, so making it
easier initially for cash-strapped households to service a loan of a given size.
Demographic and social developments mean the number of households has been
rising, while until recently the rate of house building has been low. And disillusion
with the performance of the stock market and concerns about the value of pension
promises may have boosted the demand for property as a vehicle for retirement
saving. Nevertheless, it is difficult to rationalise the full extent of the increase in
house prices and it is likely that the ratio of house prices to earnings will probably
continue to ease for a while, though a return to historical norms seems unlikely.
But while the prospects for the housing market look softer than in the recent past, that
need not imply a substantial slowing in consumers’ expenditure. Historically, house
price inflation and household spending growth have moved together, but that probably
simply reflects the impact of changes in households’ expectations of their future
incomes. Thus, during episodes like the late-1980s, excessive optimism drove up both
house prices and consumer spending, while the subsequent correction to that
exuberance put them into reverse.
During the past few years, however, this correlation between house price inflation and
consumer spending growth has largely disappeared, with spending growth turning out
weaker than might have been expected on the basis of past relationships. Instead,
consumer spending has grown pretty much in line with income. This weakening of the
correlation between spending and house prices probably reflects the fact that the latter
have recently been driven not by optimistic income expectations, but by other factors.
In that case, it is reasonable to expect the impact on spending of slowing house price
inflation to be equally muted.
Such thinking underlies our projection for continued moderate growth in consumer
spending over the next few quarters. But it must be recognised that there is
4

considerable uncertainty here, both about the extent and duration in the slowing of
house price inflation and the strength of the connection with consumer demand. So
there is a risk that spending could slow more sharply than the MPC expect.
My third uncertainty relates to the prospects for inflation. Now conventional
economic wisdom suggests that higher activity will lead to higher inflation and,
furthermore, that any attempt to hold activity above its sustainable level indefinitely is
likely to result in inflation accelerating. But, over the last decade, consumer price
inflation has been both subdued and unusually stable, fluctuating between just 0.8%
and 2.6%, while the unemployment rate has fallen from double-digit levels to just
4.6% today. So, as unemployment has fallen, inflation has remained low and stable,
suggesting that any positive relationship between activity and inflation has all but
disappeared. What has caused this flattening of the relationship between activity and
inflation? And can we rely on it continuing?
Part of the explanation almost certainly lies in the various structural reforms to the
labour market enacted over the past twenty years, including changes to union
legislation and to the tax and benefit system. They have facilitated job creation and
encouraged the unemployed and inactive to search for work. That has allowed the
unemployment rate to return to levels last seen in the mid-1970s without generating
the excessive upward pressure on wages that we saw then. And, more recently, it
appears that inward migration, from the EU accession countries and elsewhere, has
helped to relieve labour shortages in some sectors of the economy.
But that is only part of the story. There have also been important developments in
product markets. First, the international terms of trade – that is the price of the goods
and services we export relative to the price of those we import – has moved in our
favour. That means that if earnings were merely to rise in line with the price of UK
output, the purchasing power of UK workers – who buy imported goods as well as
goods produced here – would nevertheless be rising. That in turn has reduced the
pressure for higher wages.
Now it is tempting to think that this is just a reflection of the fact that the prices of
some goods, particularly clothing and footwear and electronic goods, have been
5

falling sharply as manufacturing production has shifted from the industrialised
countries to East Asia. But it turns out that there is more going on than this. It also
appears that the relative prices of some of the services that we export have risen too.
In other words, the evolving pattern of global comparative advantage has been
particularly favourable to the United Kingdom.
Second, an intensification of competitive pressures, particularly in the distributive and
retail sectors, has put downward pressure on prices and margins. Deregulation in the
car market has pushed the prices of motor vehicles down. And the buying power of
the big supermarket chains has forced their suppliers to keep costs down. Though that
has certainly been tough on producers, it is has (usually) been of considerable benefit
to consumers.
A third possible explanation for the extraordinary stability of inflation over the last
decade lies in the change in the UK’s monetary policy regime, beginning with the
adoption of an inflation target following the exit from the Exchange Rate Mechanism
and reinforced by the Chancellor’s decision in 1997 to pass operational responsibility
for setting interest rates to the MPC. That has resulted in less persistent movements in
inflation, and financial markets and surveys both suggest that inflation expectations
are well anchored around the target. In such an environment, a temporary burst of
price inflation is less likely to lead to demands for higher nominal wages to
compensate. And, in an environment with low and stable inflation, businesses do not
need to change their prices as often, reinforcing that stability.
The $64,000 question, though, is whether these benign trends will continue, accelerate
or indeed reverse. Our central projection assumes they will continue, but at a
somewhat reduced rate. But that judgement could easily be wrong.
The reports from our regional Agents continue to indicate that businesses in many
parts of the country are finding it hard to find workers with the requisite skills.
Margins cannot be squeezed indefinitely without driving producers out of business.
And it would be unwise to bank on the terms of trade continuing to move in our
favour. All this might suggest an upside risk to inflation.

6

But equally there may be scope for considerable further restructuring in the retail
sector. And the United Kingdom might start to see the sort of upturn in productivity
growth already witnessed in the United States. That would suggest that inflationary
pressures could remain subdued.
I hope what I have said tonight makes clear that considerable uncertainties surround
the outlook going forward. And that is why it does not make much sense to ask
whether interest rates have peaked. That will depend on whether or not the various
risks – including those outlined above – materialise. So if you are expecting to
discover the future path of interest rates tonight, I am afraid that I will have to
disappoint you. Neither I nor my colleagues on the MPC know how the data will
unfold over the coming months and quarters, and it is the data that will determine
where interest rates go next. But what I can at least promise you is that the MPC,
unlike the Romans, will be ready to do battle.

7

