Comments on ‘Risk and Uncertainty in Monetary Policy’ by
Alan Greenspan
Comments given by
Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England

At the American Economic Association Annual Meeting in San Diego
4 January 2004

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

1
COMMENTS ON ‘RISK AND UNCERTAINTY IN MONETARY POLICY’ BY
ALAN GREENSPAN, AEA ANNUAL CONFERENCE, 2004
Mervyn King*
The success of the American economy, and of the Federal Reserve in responding to the large
economic and other shocks with which it has been confronted, is a tribute to Alan Greenspan
and his colleagues. It ensures that his paper will be widely read and studied.
Some characterisations of monetary policy imply that it is possible to write down a statecontingent optimal policy rule derived from an underlying model, about which we may not
know the parameters, but whose structure is generally well-understood. If so, then the
optimal policy would essentially be mechanical, and central bankers, in John Maynard
Keynes’ (1931, pp. 373) phrase, ‘humble, competent people, on a level with dentists’.
Greenspan is widely acknowledged as a great central banker. Surely, he is more interesting
than a dentist. Why is he invited to address the AEA? It is because the simple
characterisation of monetary policy above misses much of what is essential about the
monetary policy process ─ that is, learning, judgement about risks and communication – in
the face of pervasive uncertainty.
The first part of the paper provides a summary of the Federal Reserve’s management of the
US economy during Greenspan’s tenure as FOMC chairman. Although policy-makers can
take some credit for keeping a firm hand on the monetary tiller, Greenspan acknowledges
that: ‘…monetary policy in the post-Volcker era has been operating in an environment
particularly conducive to the pursuit of price stability.’ This has happened for three reasons:
i) increased political support for price stability;
ii) increased competition as a result of globalisation; and
iii) rising productivity growth, which has helped to subdue cost-push pressures.

2
There has also been a favourable monetary policy environment in the United Kingdom since
the early 1990’s, where we have enjoyed what can be described as a NICE (non inflationary
consistently expansionary) decade. Will the favourable environment continue? There seems
no sign of an end to higher productivity growth in the United States, nor to the impact of
globalisation on competition in products for manufactured goods. But will the political
support for price stability continue? Much of it derives from the experience of high inflation
in the period from the late 1960s to the early 1980s. Some of you in the audience are too
young to belong to the ‘inflation generation’. One of the continuing responsibilities of a
central bank is to build a constituency for price stability.
I shall comment briefly on three aspects of the paper:
•

the ‘risk management’ approach to monetary policy-making;

•

the discussion of how monetary policy should respond to asset prices;

•

the discussion of inflation targeting.

1) The ‘risk management’ approach:
Greenspan defines the approach by saying that policy makers should look at a range of ‘risks’
to output and inflation; and give due consideration to those risks when setting policy. He
argues that policy makers cannot just rely on the forecasts from a structural model of the
economy when even deep parameters are drifting. They should also use their judgement;
compare current experiences with previous, similar episodes; and continually test and update
a range of reduced-form models, which should help give some insight into how the economy
is evolving.

3
This is the approach taken at the Bank of England, where the Monetary Policy Committee
takes into account the entire distribution of future outcomes for inflation and output when
setting interest rates. A ‘fanchart’ for its forecasts of both inflation and output is published in
the quarterly Inflation Report.
Greenspan suggests that the ‘risk-management approach’ is an application of Bayesian
decision making when there is uncertainty about the true model of the economy. Policy that
is optimal in one particular model of the economy may not be ‘robust’ across a class of other
models. In fact, it may lead to a very bad outcome should an alternative model turn out to be
true. Model uncertainty might be high at present: increasing globalisation and competition
may be changing old-established economic relationships.
Of course, although such an approach is sensible, it is still vulnerable to policy makers giving
excessive weight to misleading models of the economy. Greenspan’s description of the
current ‘risk management’ approach sounds similar to Timothy Cogley and Thomas
Sargent’s (2003) description of why the Fed failed to tighten policy in the 1970s. Even
though the ‘most likely’ model of the economy at that time (the ‘Lucas-Sargent’ model with
long-run neutrality) favoured a sharp policy tightening, the expected loss in competing
models (with a long-run trade-off between output and inflation) was large. So a Bayesian
decision maker would have behaved exactly as the Fed did, keeping policy looser than
‘optimal’ in the ‘most likely’ model.
This is not dissimilar to the monetary position in 2003. Greenspan provides a convincing
explanation of why policy should be looser than ‘optimal’ in order to avoid the risk of
deflation.
But, in the end, there is no escaping the need to make judgements about which models are
more plausible than others.

4
2) Asset prices:
Greenspan argues that asset prices are not targets in themselves, but they are an important
part of the transmission mechanism. I agree. In the United Kingdom, we have also had to
deal with our fair share of large movements in asset prices during recent years - a 20% rise in
the effective exchange rate in the late 1990s and, more recently, house prices rising at more
than 25% per annum. This, of course, is in addition to the rapid rise and fall in equity prices
during the past five years. Recent Bank of England policy has arguably been similar to that
of the Federal Reserve, which is described by Greenspan as ‘mitigat[ing] the fallout when it
occurs’. It is hard to forecast asset price movements accurately or to identify asset price
‘bubbles’. Even if we could identify them, it is not clear how effectively we could in practice
control them. Greenspan points out that most of the tightenings during his period of
chairmanship were followed by a rise in equity prices, leading to the conclusion that only a
severe rise in short-term rates, and the associated economic downturn, would have been able
to keep the stock-price ‘bubble’ in check.
There is agreement in the literature that a central bank should care about asset prices at least
to the extent that they influence inflation and output. There is less agreement on whether it
should respond directly to asset prices (Ben Bernanke and Mark Gertler (2001), Steven
Cecchetti et al (2000)).
Within an inflation-targeting framework, a forward-looking central bank would bear in mind
how asset-price movements affect output and inflation forecasts. Mervyn King (2002) and
Charles Bean (2003) argue that the horizon over which inflation is brought back to target may
need to be extended to prevent a build-up of financial imbalances. This may mean that the
central bank is willing to sacrifice a small deviation from the inflation target in the short run
in order to mitigate the risk of a larger deviation of inflation further ahead.

5
3) Inflation targeting:
Greenspan notes that the actual behaviour of central banks does not vary too much, regardless
of whether they have an explicit inflation target or not. This is consistent with the view in
King (1997) that any (coherent) monetary policy can be written as an inflation target plus a
response to (supply) shocks. One difference, though, is the willingness in inflation-targeting
countries to be explicit about the long-run inflation rate that constitutes price stability.
Inflation targeting allows a central bank to get (close) to the optimal state contingent rule by a
process of ‘constrained discretion’. The framework allows for a flexible response to supply
shocks. Although Greenspan believes that there is no firm evidence that the announcement
of an inflation target necessarily increases credibility, he acknowledges that the Bank of
England’s experience in anchoring inflation expectations has been encouraging.
In the United Kingdom we found that an inflation target brought three advantages. I do not
claim that all, or indeed any, of these are relevant to the United States.
First, an inflation target is useful in establishing the political legitimacy for an independent
central bank, especially when taking unpopular decisions. Politicians and voters are
reminded of the framework of monetary policy to which they have agreed.
Second, an inflation target helps the transparency and accountability of monetary policy. In
explaining to the public the risks to the outlook for inflation and output growth, it is helpful
for the central bank to describe them in terms of deviations of outcomes from a central target.
Many households are used to probabilities, for example in weather forecasts. There is no
reason for their finding difficulty in understanding statements of the kind, ‘the probability
that inflation will exceed the target over the next two years is x percent’. So a target helps the
transparency of policy when the reasons for decisions on interest rates are being explained to

6
the wider public. A target also helps when assessing ex post explanations of the behaviour of
inflation, and so makes it easier for policy-makers to be held to account. Shocks of various
kinds mean that inflation will hardly ever be precisely at the target, but it is difficult to
appraise the explanations provided by the central bank if the public do not know the value of
the target.
Third, a target makes it easier to manage inflation expectations. As Michael Woodford
(2003) points out, inflation expectations are central to monetary policy. A numerical target
helped to convince agents that the Bank of England was serious about meeting its target, and
that therefore bargains on wages and prices should also take that target seriously.
In the end, however, what central banks have in common is more important than what divides
them. The essential steps in constructing monetary policy common to central banks today are
the following. First, a recognition that the lags in the transmission mechanism mean that
policy must be forward-looking. Second, such a policy requires a forecast. A forecast is
about probabilities, not point estimates. The key to communicating policy is to explain the
nature of the risks to the outlook for inflation and output. Third, since policy is decisionmaking under uncertainty, it is pre-emptive and can be described as risk management. Some
policy decisions in recent years, both in United States and United Kingdom, were seen as
taking out insurance. Fourth, the policy reaction function will change over time as we learn
about changes in the structure of the economy. Subject to that, however, the reaction
function should be as predictable as possible. That is why central banks today give much
weight to the need to provide reasons for their decisions and to explain both what we know
and what we do not know. It is crucial to recognise the limits to our knowledge, and to do
our best to explain that to the wider public. If we are successful, then policy decisions may

7
not be popular but they will be predictable. And that is the way successfully to anchor
inflation expectations.

8

References
Bean, Charles. “Asset Prices, Financial Imbalances and Monetary Policy, Are Inflation
Targets Enough?” in T. Richards and T. Robinson, eds., Asset Prices and Monetary Policy.
Reserve Bank of Australia, 2003, pp. 48-76.
Bernanke, Ben S. and Gertler, Mark. “Should Central Banks Respond to Movements in
Asset Prices?” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 2001, 91(2), pp. 243257.
Cecchetti, Steven G; Genberg, Hans; Lipsky, John and Wadhwani, Sushil B. Asset
Prices and Central Bank Policy. Geneva Reports on the World Economy No. 2: International
Centre for Monetary and Banking Studies and Centre for Economic Policy Research, Geneva,
2000.
Cogley, Timothy and Sargent, Thomas J. “The Conquest of US Inflation: Learning and
Robustness to Model Uncertainty.” unpublished manuscript, available at:
ftp://zia.stanford.edu/pub/sargent/webdocs/research/inflat13.pdf
Keynes, John Maynard. Essays in Persuasion, MacMillan, London, 1931, pp 373.
King, Mervyn A. “Changes in UK Monetary Policy: Rules and Discretion in Practice.”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 1997, (39), pp. 81-87.
King, Mervyn A. “The Inflation Target Ten Years On.” Bank of England Quarterly
Bulletin, 2002, 42 (4), pp. 459-474.
Woodford, Michael. Interest and Prices. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003.

9

Footnote
*

Governor, Bank of England, Threadneedle Street, London, United Kingdom, EC2R

8AH. I am very grateful to Simon Ainsworth, James Proudman and James Talbot for helpful
comments.

