Containing System-Wide Liquidity Risks: Some Issues and
Challenges
Speech given by
Nigel Jenkinson, Adviser to the Governor, Bank of England

At the University of Frankfurt Conference on the “Law and Economics of Money and
Finance in Times of Financial Crisis”
15 May 2009

I am very grateful to Nicola Anderson, Emily Beau, Roger Clews, Sebastiano Daros, John Elliott,
Lee Hemphill, Marius Jurgilas, Sujit Kapadia, Jochen Schanz, George Speight and Paul Tucker for
helpful comments and assistance.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2

CONTAINING SYSTEM-WIDE LIQUIDITY RISKS: SOME ISSUES AND
CHALLENGES
Section 1: Introduction
1

Commercial banks’ ability to transform short-term deposits into long-term loans

provides clear benefits to individual agents and to the economy more broadly. Savers
can place funds with banks that are available contractually on demand or with a short
delay. Depositors can thus draw down their funds quickly in the event of an adverse
shock, such as a temporary spell of unemployment, or to finance transactions that may
sometimes be ‘lumpy’ at the level of an individual household, such as a deposit on a
house. And borrowers can obtain funding to support the purchase of assets providing
economic services over the long term, such as plant and machinery and commercial
and residential property.
2

Banks provide such maturity transformation by pooling across agents and taking

account of aggregate behaviour. In any one period, only a small proportion of savers
will experience an adverse shock or make a major lumpy payment that requires a
large withdrawal. Moreover, recipients of such payments are likely to place the
proceeds back into the banking system. A bank that has just financed a large payment
can bid for the surplus deposits on the interbank market. So, providing savers retain
confidence in the bank, deposits with an immediate or short-term contractual maturity
are transformed through this pooling process into deposits with a much longer term
‘effective’ maturity. That enables the bank to offer long-term loans.
3

‘Providing savers retain confidence in the bank’ is of course the key phrase here.

By undertaking maturity transformation, banks are exposed to funding liquidity risk –
the risk that a bank cannot generate sufficient cash to meet the obligations placed
upon it in any time period. Perceptions that a bank is facing liquidity pressures will
lead to a withdrawal of funding and ultimately to a ‘run’, as time deposits are not
rolled over and as customers withdraw demand deposits (particularly if deposit
insurance arrangements are weak). An inability to withstand such pressure and
restore market confidence quickly will lead to failure of the bank, unless additional
support can be obtained either from the private sector (for example, through an

3
injection of funding or a takeover by a stronger bank) or from the central bank (in
cases where the problem is demonstrably one of liquidity rather than solvency, and
the authorities are concerned that failure of the bank would threaten stability of the
system more broadly).
4

The managers and shareholders of a bank will face losses if funding liquidity risk

crystallises. That provides an incentive to manage and control liquidity risk. The
losses are capped, however, for example for equity holders to the value of their equity
in the bank. Such losses thus do not capture the broader impact of severe liquidity
distress on the wider financial system. A bank facing acute liquidity pressures may
attempt to sell assets at “fire sale” prices, lowering market liquidity and adding to
balance sheet and liquidity pressures on other banks.1 It is also likely to hoard
liquidity, withdrawing funding from the interbank market and shortening the terms of
remaining lending. And other banks and financial intermediaries may also hoard
liquidity as a defensive response, exacerbating the stress on the system. In addition, a
bank that fails is likely to generate counterparty losses for other banks and increase
funding pressures on banks operating perceived similar funding models. There is no
incentive for the managers and shareholders of a bank to take account of the
‘externalities’ of their own liquidity distress on other banks and the financial system
more broadly. That provides a clear justification for regulation and supervision of
liquidity risk, to hold banks to higher standards than they would naturally adopt given
their own individual incentives, in support of the public policy goal of protecting
financial stability.2
5

The current financial crisis has exposed severe failings in risk management by

financial firms and flaws in regulatory design. One clear lesson is that insufficient
attention was given to the system-wide dimension of risks. In designing prudential
regulation to support the resilience and robustness of the financial system as a whole,
it is essential to consider both the likelihood that a number of firms will face a
common stress at the same time, and the impact of their response to that stress on
other firms and the wider system. Such responses may substantially amplify the
impact of the individual shock. Moreover, they may negate the value of some
defences that would work effectively if a bank were the only one to face a particular
1
2

Cifuentes et al (2005), Brunnermeier and Pederson (2007).
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2008b), Brunnermeier et al (2009).

4
adverse shock. It is clearly important that regulatory design delivers resilience to a
system-wide shock as well as to a firm-specific one. Indeed, the very marked rise in
international financial market integration in recent years,3 as well as the growing
convergence in business models across the global financial system, has increased the
relative chances that adverse shocks will have system-wide ramifications.4
6

There are many examples of the importance of system-wide interactions and

feedback effects for the design of financial market regulation and of market
infrastructure.5 The current crisis has demonstrated vividly the importance of
feedbacks within the financial system, and between the financial system and the
macroeconomy.6 For example, attempts by banks individually to rein back lending to
limit prospective credit losses may in practice lead collectively to a rise in such losses,
as a widespread shortage of credit would deepen the recession. Another example is
that the design of payment and settlement systems should ensure that system problems
in one institution do not spill over to the whole network, and that the systems are as
robust as possible to potential single points of failure.7 I plan, however, in my
remarks today to focus especially on the issue of liquidity risk. That is an area where
system-wide interactions are particularly important.
7

The next section describes briefly how system-wide liquidity risks rose in advance

of the crisis and why some defences to the crystallisation of liquidity risk in individual
banks were ineffective in cases of system-wide stress. Section 3 sets out some highlevel objectives to bear in mind in considering ways to reduce both the likelihood and
impact of events of severe liquidity stress. Section 4 discusses some of the practical
challenges and outstanding issues in carrying these ideas forward.

3

Hamilton et al (2007), Haldane (2009a and b).
Gai et al (2007), Haldane (2009b), Gai and Kapadia (2009).
5
See Renault et al (2008) for a payment systems example.
6
It is vital to take such feedbacks into account in judging risks to the financial system as a whole
Jenkinson (2007), Haldane (2009a and b). The Bank of England is developing a model to support the
assessment and modelling of systemic risk (Aikman et al (2009), Alessandri et al (2009), Haldane
(2009a)).
7
Bedford et al (2004).
4

5
Section 2: Liquidity risk and the current crisis
8

The origins of the crisis have been described well in a number of reports and

speeches.8 I shall keep my summary brief and focus particularly on the liquidity risk
dimension.
9

Fuelled by low global real interest rates (associated with high Asian saving rates),

a perceived decline in macroeconomic volatility, and rapid advances in information
and communication technology that spurred innovation, capital market activity and
financial system leverage rose sharply and persistently in the years ahead of the crisis.
Market participants sought higher yields by increasing leverage both on and off
balance sheet and by investing in higher risk, innovative and complex structured
products. Many banks saw opportunities to exploit new wholesale market funding
sources to expand activity, in some cases to finance loan origination for eventual sale,
in others to fund holdings of highly rated structured assets both on and off balance
sheet. Banks’ funding liquidity became increasingly dependent on sustained market
liquidity.9 In advance of the crisis, high market confidence supported high market
liquidity (Chart 1).10 Indeed, Federal Reserve Governor Kevin Warsh argued that in
terms of its most fundamental feature: “Market liquidity is confidence”.11 But as
leverage rose, credit spreads tightened, and liquidity risk premia narrowed, the
likelihood of a sharp and pronounced correction continued to increase.12 Indeed as
Claudio Borio has noted, the vulnerability to a change in market liquidity is highest
when liquidity itself appears at its most plentiful: “The illusion of permanent market
liquidity, in the strong sense of feeling always able to transact at the prevailing price,
is the most insidious threat to liquidity itself”.13
10

Once sentiment changes it may change very quickly. To take a sporting analogy:

“Confidence is contagious. So is lack of confidence” Vince Lombardi.14 And
financial markets are particularly vulnerable to contagious swings in confidence given
the importance of the interactions between participants and the influence of others’
8

For example see Bank of England Financial Stability Reports 22 (2007), 23 (2008) and 24 (2008),
Turner (2009).
9
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2008a).
10
Kerry (2008).
11
Warsh (2007a).
12
Bank of England Financial Stability Report April 2007 and King (2007).
13
Borio (2004).
14
Legendary coach of the Green Bay Packers.

6
behaviour.15 My incentive to sell a financial asset or withdraw funds from a bank
increases if I expect that others are about to sell or run from the bank.
11 By the first half of 2007, many financial market participants were expressing
concerns that compensation for taking both credit and liquidity risks had been bid
down to unsustainably low levels. Equally, while many recognised that financial risks
were rising, few were prepared to pull out of the most over-heated markets or take the
contrary position. Pressures to match short-term performance led to a reluctance to
restrict risk-taking before competitors. Running profits had been a successful strategy
over a number of years, notwithstanding warnings of heightened risks in speeches and
numerous Financial Stability Reports across the globe. And many market participants
thought the business risks of withdrawing actively from certain markets were higher
than the increased financial risks they were running.16
12 A major mistake made by many was failing to recognise the similarity of their risk
position to that of many others, and the vulnerabilities that posed. As concerns about
the credit quality of US sub-prime assets rose, market liquidity evaporated as many
participants simultaneously attempted to sell or hedge positions, with few if any
investors willing or able to fund a major contrarian position on the other side of the
trade given the weight of selling pressure and the marked rise in uncertainty. It very
quickly became a similar story in other asset-backed securities markets, as investors
attempted to lower risk positions, given increased concerns about the opacity and
underlying credit quality of structured products in particular, and as market
participants hoarded liquidity to protect themselves against a perceived rise in
redemption risk. The hoarding of liquidity by stronger market participants
compounded pressures on institutions with structurally weak funding positions, such
as Northern Rock. Financial market liquidity fell dramatically as confidence was lost
(Chart 2).
13 Defences against a rise in system-wide liquidity pressure were clearly inadequate.
Indeed, attempts by banks to use defences designed to address idiosyncratic liquidity
problems affecting the bank in isolation severely compounded system-wide stress.17

15

Bernardo and Welch (2004), Morris and Shin (2004).
Bank of England Financial Stability Report (July 2006 and April 2007).
17
Jenkinson (2008).
16

7
14 Consider the options available to a bank suddenly faced by a liquidity problem –
perhaps, for example, because of the revelation of unexpected losses due to a fraud
that raises market uncertainty but does not jeopardise solvency? Assume the bank is
the only one affected and that other banks have strong funding positions and that
financial market liquidity is high. A number of options are open. Examine the
following three. First, the bank could sell (or repo) less liquid assets, accepting a loss
in income to obtain additional liquidity. Alternatively, the bank could ‘pay up’ for
additional funding, offering higher returns to attract deposits. Third, the bank could
scale back lending plans by raising borrowing rates and introducing more stringent
lending conditions. Each of the defences would work. The bank would have to pay
more and accept a loss in profitability to restore confidence in its liquidity position.
And there would be a small adverse effect on other banks and the financial system
more broadly. But under the conditions outlined, these would be easily absorbed.
15 A bank focussing on its own liquidity risk in isolation might consequently draw
comfort from such defences. But consider now the merits of such defences when
other banks are facing similar pressures and attempting to use the same tools? The
first option will no longer work, as a sudden, sharp increase in selling pressure is
likely to lead to a complete evaporation of market liquidity for less liquid assets.
Paying up for additional funding is also likely to be relatively ineffective as many
other banks pursue the same strategy and compete actively to retain and indeed
increase deposits – any impact from higher aggregate savings is likely to be small and
sluggish at the level of the individual bank. And the third option of restricting lending
growth may appear attractive to an individual bank, but again will precipitate a
defensive response from other banks attempting to strengthen their own liquidity and
credit position, and, as noted above, could severely amplify the adverse impact of the
initial shock. So not only is the comfort drawn from such defences false in this case,
but an attempt to use them is likely to have an adverse impact on other banks and the
financial system more broadly given the externalities and spillovers they entail.
16 Problems of poor liquidity risk management have been exacerbated by the undercapitalisation of the banking system in advance of the crisis. A fear that
counterparties may have insufficient capital and reserves to meet obligations clearly
has a major and immediate impact on the availability of funding to such firms.

8
Moreover, lenders in a relatively strong funding position are likely to hoard their own
liquidity in conditions of heightened uncertainty, both to contain counterparty risks
and to guard against a rise in their own perceived redemption risk. Such behaviour
has been very clearly apparent during the current crisis, and was particularly acute
following the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008.18 Provision of
additional capital is essential to bolster confidence and maintain financial stability in
such circumstances. And there are clear lessons from the crisis that the quantity and
quality of capital must be raised in the future to strengthen the resilience of the
banking system.19 A stronger capital position will have some benefits on liquidity
risk given the clear inter-relationships between the two.20 As Charles Goodhart has
remarked “An illiquid bank (system) would not remain solvent for long, nor an
insolvent bank (system) remain liquid”.21 But equally, measures to strengthen the
capital position alone are unlikely to correct for market failures leading to excess
system-wide liquidity risk. The recent crisis has clearly highlighted the need to
strengthen defences against liquidity risk as well as to bolster future capital levels.
Section 3: Reducing the likelihood and impact of severe liquidity stress – some
guiding objectives
17 Reducing the likelihood and impact of future episodes of system-wide liquidity
risk is high on the policy agenda.22 Given the numerous shortcomings revealed by the
recent crisis, the Basel Committee has revised and strengthened its high level ‘Sound
Principles’ that provide guidance on the management and supervision of liquidity
risk,23 and is taking further action to improve the consistency and robustness of
liquidity risk standards for international banks. CEBS is undertaking parallel work
within Europe. Domestically, the FSA is consulting on improvements to the UK
regime for the management and supervision of liquidity risk in line with the Basel
Sound Principles.24
18 These initiatives are all very welcome and should help strengthen substantially the
management and supervision of liquidity risk by individual firms, taking more explicit
18

Bank of England Financial Stability Report (October 2008), Heider et al (2009)
G20 (2009).
20
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2008b).
21
Cited with permission of Professor Goodhart.
22
G20 (2009).
23
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2008b).
24
FSA (2008).
19

9
account of system-wide interactions. Strengthening the robustness of the individual
institutions is an important precondition to contain incentives for banks collectively to
take excess system-wide liquidity risk. As recent academic work has highlighted,
however, there are some difficult and challenging issues governing the design of
future financial regulation to take full account of such system-wide risks.25 Further
research and analysis should over time yield additional insights that may help promote
further improvements to policy design and implementation over and above those
currently in hand. To support that process in relation to liquidity risk, the BCBS and
CGFS are setting up a joint research programme on the measurement of systemic
funding liquidity risk, as recommended by the Financial Stability Forum.26
19 As re-emphasised recently in the Turner Report,27 the design of regulation must
balance both costs and benefits. While it is clear that standards of financial regulation
must be toughened to lower the probability and impact of future financial crises, it is
also important to bear in mind the impact of regulation on financial intermediation
and the wider economy in drawing the appropriate balance. In relation to the design
of liquidity regulation, the high level objective is to reduce the frequency and severity
of system-wide liquidity crises, while recognising, as highlighted in the introduction,
the economy-wide benefits of maturity transformation and of banks taking sustainable
liquidity risks. Gauging the appropriate level of intervention to balance the costs and
benefits of financial regulation is a formidable challenge for policy makers, as the
Turner Report highlights, and is an important area for further research.
20 Set against this broad background, there are a number of high-level objectives that
in my view should influence the future development and design of a framework for
liquidity regulation as research and analysis continues. These are set out below. The
following section provides a preliminary assessment of some of the issues and
challenges in meeting the objectives.

25

For example, see Brunnermeier et al (2009) and Perotti and Suarez (2009).
FSF (2009)
27
Turner (2009).
26

10
21 Five high level objectives are proposed below:
Objective 1: Liquidity regulation should encourage prudent liquidity risk
management by individual banks. Defences should be robust to both the
crystallisation of firm-specific and market-wide stress.
Objective 2: Liquidity regulation should provide a disincentive for banks to increase
liquidity risk. The disincentive should take into account the impact of liquidity risk
distress at the bank on the overall financial system.
Objective 3: Liquidity regulation should guard against the crystallisation of systemwide liquidity risk. Disincentives to contain liquidity risk should increase as systemwide liquidity risk rises.
Objective 4: Regulatory standards should be applied consistently internationally, to
prevent regulatory arbitrage and leakage.
Objective 5: The design and operation of central bank facilities should underpin
incentives for banks to manage liquidity risk prudently, in the long-run interests not
only of the banking system but of the wider economy.
Section 4: Issues and challenges in meeting these objectives
22 The objectives set out above are designed to fit together as a package. That
should be borne in mind as a number of the issues and challenges in fulfilling these
high level guidelines are highlighted in turn below.
Objective 1: Liquidity regulation should encourage prudent liquidity risk
management by individual banks. Defences should be robust to both the
crystallisation of firm-specific and market-wide stress.
23 As emphasised in the revised Basel Sound Principles,28 a bank is responsible for
the sound management of liquidity risk. The bank should establish a robust liquidity
risk management framework that ensures it maintains sufficient liquidity, including a
cushion of unencumbered, high quality liquid assets, to withstand a range of stress
events, including the loss or impairment of both unsecured and secured funding
28

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2008b).

11
sources. To support confidence in the strength of liquidity risk management, it is vital
that banks build up defences that are useable to meet potential liquidity demands
under conditions of severe market stress. To contain system-wide spillovers and
risks, prudent liquidity risk management by individual banks must ensure that use of
the defences does not have a major adverse impact on the rest of the financial system.
24 Objective 1 consequently supports banks holding increased stocks of the highest
quality safe liquid assets, such as cash and high quality government bonds, as
proposed in the revised Basel Sound Principles document and the recent FSA
Consultation Paper. These assets can typically be utilised to raise liquidity in private
markets even under conditions of market strain, without prompting large haircuts or
fire-sale discounts that add to stress on other banks and the financial system.
25 As I noted in a speech a year ago,29 banks were poorly placed to use such defences
in the current crisis, as many had economised on holdings of the highest quality assets
in their internal treasury operations (Charts 3 and 4), based on the erroneous
assumption that higher-yielding, riskier assets would remain liquid. Rebuilding these
defences is an important component of the strengthening of liquidity risk management
in the medium term.
26 There are, however, a number of open and difficult questions in gauging the
optimal size of defences to liquidity stress. As highlighted above, analysis and
research on these questions must take into account the strategic interactions within
financial markets that govern behavioural responses to liquidity stress: the incentive
to run (or sell assets) rises, the greater the perception that other participants will run or
sell. Higher reserves of liquidity will thus strengthen confidence; the higher the level
of confidence, the less the likelihood that the reserves will be used. Given the aim of
sustaining confidence, as Paul Tucker recently noted,30 a time series showing low use
of a liquidity reserve does not provide compelling evidence that a standard was too
strict.

29
30

Jenkinson (2008)
Tucker (2009)

12
Objective 2: Liquidity regulation should provide a disincentive for banks to
increase liquidity risk. The disincentive should take into account the impact of
liquidity risk distress at the bank on the overall financial system.
27 The regulatory disincentive should encourage banks to seek longer maturity, more
stable, funding sources and to improve the liquidity of their overall balance sheet. For
example, the disincentive should rise in line with estimates of maturity mismatch the
bank is running. Further analysis of the potential role of metrics such as the core
funding ratio (the proportion of a bank’s funding from more stable, longer-term
sources)31 and net cash capital would be useful in this context.32
28 As emphasised in the introduction, the case for regulatory intervention to support
the public policy goal of protecting system-wide stability rests on the market failure
that banks have no natural incentive to take account of the adverse impact of their
own distress on the financial system more broadly. Extending this argument, the
regulatory disincentive should consequently take account of the system-wide impact
of a firm’s distress. As noted in the recent Geneva Report and in two recent speeches
by Andrew Haldane, prudential regulation should thus be calibrated to such systemwide externalities.33 To illustrate this argument, standards of resilience should be
tougher for a large bank that plays a very active role in interbank markets and as a
key market maker in capital markets, than for a small bank with few interconnections
to the rest of the financial system. Liquidity stress will have a much more pronounced
impact on the overall system in the former case.
29 Developing a formal approach to implement this objective remains an important
challenge for researchers and policymakers. In particular, research to develop robust
indicators of the importance of individual institutions in financial networks and of
system-wide spillovers in distress remains in its infancy. There are some promising
ideas, such as the so-called CoVar (or more generally co-risk) approach developed by
Brunnermeier and Adrian that delivers estimates of the correlation of tail risks.34 And

31

See Turner (2009).
Net Cash Capital is generally defined as Long Term Funding minus Illiquid Assets minus Illiquid
Portion of Securities.
33
Brunnermeier et al (2009) and Haldane (2009a and b).
34
See Brunnermeier and Adrian (2008).
32

13
research within the Bank of England is attempting to model liquidity spillovers.35 But
considering how best to redesign prudential regulation to capture system-wide
externalities more effectively warrants much further analysis and research.
Objective 3: Liquidity regulation should guard against the crystallisation of
system-wide liquidity risk. Disincentives to contain liquidity risk should increase
as system-wide liquidity risk rises.
30 System-wide liquidity risk has both cross-section and time series dimensions. The
discussion of objective 2 above highlights the importance of taking into account the
role played by each bank in the financial system, and of imposing more stringent
standards on institutions that pose the greatest threat to the stability of the financial
system if they come under pressure. There is, however, also an important time series
aspect to add to this cross-section story. For example, system-wide liquidity risk is
more likely to crystallise at times when maturity mismatch across the system as a
whole is high than when it is low. That suggests that there is merit in trying to
develop reliable indicators of system-wide liquidity risks that could be used to support
macro-prudential objectives. Under this approach, incipient signs of an excessive
build up of system-wide liquidity risk would lead to a strengthening of disincentives
to take liquidity risk.
31 Academic economists have highlighted that system-wide liquidity risk depends on
the interactions and interconnections between banks. For example, Hellwig provides
an example of a funding chain along the following lines: bank 1 takes deposits at
sight and lends them for one week to bank 2; which then in turn lends the one week
deposit for two weeks to bank 3; which on-lends the two week funds for three weeks
to bank 4 and so on….36 Maturity mismatch by each bank is limited to one week.
But system-wide maturity mismatch for a chain of n banks extends to n weeks – an
attempt by the initial depositors to demand full repayment of their sight deposits
would ripple through the system and, absent any liquidity reserves, would ultimately
depend on the liquidity of the n week maturity assets owned by the nth bank.

35
36

Aikman et al (2009)
Brunnermeier et al (2009).

14
32 This stylised example illustrates the inherent difficulties of developing regulatory
approaches to guard against system-wide liquidity risks, based purely on measures of
maturity mismatch by individual banks. That said, signs that a large number of banks
were extending their individual maturity mismatches would provide an important
amber light.
33 Another approach that might yield dividends would be to develop supplementary
indicators that could act as proxies for system-wide liquidity risk. Such proxies could
in principle provide valuable macro-prudential signals that could guide supervisory
standards and help to dampen the financial cycle.
34 More research and analysis is needed to develop and review such indicators.
Some candidates are beginning to emerge. For example, Drehmann and Nikolaou
have developed an interesting measure of system-wide funding risk based on the
bidding pressure for central bank funds.37 Nonetheless, one problem with this
indicator for the task above is that the measure is a highly contemporaneous indicator
of system-wide liquidity pressures at a particular point in time, whereas the prudential
requirement is for an indicator containing strong leading indicator properties.
35 One indicator that might have some value in this regard is a measure of aggregate
leverage (see Chart 5). High leverage may provide an advance indication of the
potential for a large drain in financial market liquidity, should market sentiment
change and banks and other market participants seek to de-lever at the same time.
The Basel Committee is currently examining the case for introducing a supplementary
measure such as a leverage ratio to bolster the capital framework. A possible byproduct of the introduction of such a measure is that it might also restrain systemwide liquidity risk, although more research and analysis is needed to review the
robustness of this link.
36 A further option could be to try to derive a measure of system-wide maturity
mismatch that strips out the impact of the interbank market (the internal part of the
‘Hellwig chain’ outlined above) by focussing on transactions with non-banks. A good
measure of the aggregate maturity breakdown of banking system assets and liabilities
with non-banks could provide such a guide. There is currently no such indicator
37

Drehmann, M and Nikolaou, K (2009)

15
readily to hand for the UK: deriving one from the major banks’ balance sheets may
yield interesting insights.
37 Another possibility worth exploring further is a market-based estimate of the
compensation for liquidity risk, for example, derived from a decomposition of
corporate bond spreads (see Chart 6).38 While bearing in mind that structural factors
such as market transparency and corporate governance will affect the long-run
sustainable compensation for liquidity risk, an indication that such compensation was
falling well below historical norms may provide a useful warning sign of a build up of
market liquidity risk (see Chart 7).39 That in turn could threaten the stability of
banking system funding given the strong links between market and funding liquidity.
Objective 4: Regulatory standards should be applied consistently
internationally, to prevent regulatory arbitrage and leakage.
38 The three objectives spelt out above are designed to strengthen system-wide
resilience to liquidity risk by improving risk management by individual banks, taking
into account the system-wide spillovers and externalities from liquidity stress and that
such system-wide risks may alter over the economic cycle. They are silent, however,
on international issues. These raise additional important challenges.
39 To date, standards and regulations for containing liquidity risk have been
developed and applied at the national level. Although unsurprisingly there is much
commonality of the high level approach, in line with successive Sound Principles
guides prepared by the Basel Committee (1992, 2000 and 2008),40 there is also
considerable diversity of detail.41 In part, the diversity may be explained by
differences in structural features of national economies and financial systems that
influence liquidity risks, such as deposit insurance arrangements and insolvency and
bank resolution regimes. For example, a jurisdiction with relatively weak deposit
insurance arrangements may ask banks to hold stronger liquidity reserves to provide
similar protection against a retail deposit run off to a jurisdiction with strong deposit
38

Webber, L and Churm , R (2007)
This chart combines the illiquidity premia (proxied by the residual from the corporate bond spread
decomposition) from four markets (US investment grade and high yield, UK investment grade and high
yield) according to their size.
40
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (1992, 2000 and 2008b.)
41
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2008a).
39

16
insurance. Likewise, a jurisdiction with weak banking resolution arrangements may
require banks to hold higher reserves because the costs of banking failure are higher
than in a jurisdiction with a stronger regime. That needs to be factored in when
assessing the consistency of national approaches to liquidity risk supervision. But
also in part, the diversity simply reflects the fact that regimes have been developed
nationally over a long period.
40 The international financial authorities are working together closely in the Basel
Committee and CEBS to improve both the robustness and the international
consistency of liquidity risk regulation and supervision. The recent G20
Communiqué42 committed the BCBS and national authorities to:
“Develop and agree by 2010 a global framework for promoting stronger liquidity
buffers at financial institutions, including cross-border institutions.”
Given the scope for arbitrage and leakage that could undermine the effectiveness of
regulation, it is very important that standards are applied consistently internationally.
Objective 5: The design and operation of central bank facilities should underpin
incentives for banks to manage liquidity risk prudently, in the long-run interests
not only of the banking system but of the wider economy.
41 As no liquidity buffer can be proof against all circumstances, central banks
provide liquidity insurance to the financial system to help contain the costs to the
wider economy of a crystallisation of the liquidity risks to which banks are exposed.
The availability of insurance, however, may encourage moral hazard – banks may
take excessive risks in the knowledge that such insurance is available.43 As noted in
the consultative paper on the Bank’s market operations last year,44 banks may
temporarily make higher profits by running higher liquidity risks, but the potential
costs to the wider economy of liquidity risk crystallising would increase.
42 The design and operation of central bank facilities should consequently support
incentives for the prudent management of liquidity risk. They should be time
consistent so that banks can plan on the assumption that they will not be altered
42

G20 (2009).
Committee on the Global Financial System (2008),
44
Bank of England (2008)
43

17
materially in the event that severe stress crystallises. But it is important to note that
such incentives cannot provide a substitute for effective prudential regulation to
correct for the misalignment between the costs of liquidity risks facing an individual
bank and the broader costs to the financial system from such risks materialising
discussed in detail above.
43 Absent any regulatory disincentive, a bank would be encouraged to take on excess
liquidity risk and turn to the central bank should the risk crystallise. In these
circumstances, the maximum cost to the equity holders of the bank would be the loss
of their equity from failure. Society, through the central bank, would still be faced
with the challenge of meeting the additional spillover costs from the bank’s
inadequate liquidity risk management on the overall financial system. As this
example shows, the incentives for banks to run excessive liquidity risks from a
system-wide perspective must be addressed through regulatory constraints on
behaviour ex ante, as they cannot be offset by penalties and haircuts on central bank
lending ex post.
Section 5: Concluding comments
44 I have set out above some high level objectives that may help guide future
research and analysis on the development of a framework to strengthen the regulation
of system-wide liquidity risks. That must balance the containment of system-wide
liquidity risks, to lower the likelihood and impact of severe financial system stress,
against the benefits the financial system provides through maturity transformation and
the taking of liquidity risk. Good progress has been made in some areas, such as
developing strong standards for liquidity risk management at individual banks that
take account of system-wide stress. In other areas, such as calibrating the potential
contribution of individual banks to potential system-wide liquidity strain and
reviewing how best to address spillovers and externalities from both a microprudential and macro-prudential perspective, research is just beginning.45 Developing
these approaches is an important objective for the design of prudential regulation in
the medium term.

45

See for example Perotti, E and Suarez, J (2009) and Brunnermeier et al (2009).

References
Aikman, D, Alessandri, P, Eklund, B, Gai, P, Kapadia, S, Martin, E, Mora, N,
Sterne, G and Willison, M (2009) ‘Funding Liquidity Risk in a Quantitative Model
of Systemic Stability’ preliminary Bank of England Working Paper.
Alessandri, P, Gai, P, Kapadia, S, Mora, N and Puhr, C (2009) ‘Towards a
Framework for Quantifying Systemic Stability’ International Journal of Central
Banking (forthcoming).
Bank of England (various) ‘Financial Stability Report: various issues ’ available at
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/fsr/index.htm .
Bank of England (2008) Consultative paper ‘The Development of the Bank’s Market
Operations’ available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/money/ .
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, Bank for International Settlements
(1992) ‘A framework for measuring and managing liquidity’ report available at
http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs10b.htm .
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, Bank for International Settlements
(2000) ‘Sound Practices for Managing Liquidity in Banking Organisations’ report
available at http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs69.htm .
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, Bank for International Settlements
(2008a) ‘Liquidity Risk: Management and Supervisory Challenges’ report available
at available at http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs136.htm .
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, Bank for International Settlements
(2008b) ‘Principles for Sound Liquidity Risk Management and Supervision’ report
available at http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs144.htm .
Bedford, P, Millard, S and Yang, J (2004), Assessing operational risk in CHAPS
Sterling: a simulation approach’, Bank of England Financial Stability Review 16.
Bernardo, A. E., and Welch, I. (2004). ‘Liquidity and Financial Market Runs’, The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1), 135-158.
Borio, Claudio (2004), ‘Market Distress and vanishing liquidity, anatomy and policy
options’ BIS Working Paper No 158 available at
http://www.bis.org/publ/work158.htm .
Borio, Claudio (2009), ‘Ten propositions about liquidity crises’ Bank for
International Settlements, mimeograph, forthcoming in CESifo Economic Studies.
Borio, C and Drehmann, M, (2008), ‘Towards an operational framework for
financial stability: “fuzzy” measurement and its consequences’ paper presented at
the 12th Annual Conference of the Central Bank of Chile on ‘Financial Stability,
monetary policy, and central banking.

19
Brunnermeier Marcus K and Pedersen Lasse Heje, (2007),’Market Liquidity and
Funding Liquidity’ NBER Working Papers 12939, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Inc. (forthcoming in Review of Financial Studies)
Brunnermeier, M and Adrian, T, (2008), ‘CoVaR’ available at
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1269446 Social Science
Research Network Working Paper.
Brunnermeier, M, Crockett, A, Goodhart, C, Persaud, AD and Shin, H (2009)
‘The fundamental principles of financial regulation’, Geneva Reports on the World
Economy 11 discussed at 11th Geneva Conference on the World Economy hosted by
the International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies (ICMB) .
Cifuentes, R, Ferruci, G and Shin, HS (2005) ‘Liquidity risk and contagion’
Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol 3 (2-3)
Committee on the Global Financial System, Bank for International Settlements
(2008) ‘Central bank operations in response to the financial turmoil’ Paper No.31.
Drehmann, Mathias and Nikolaou, Kleopatra (2009), "Funding Liquidity Risk:
Definition and Measurement," Working Paper Series 1024, European Central Bank
Financial Services Authority (2008) Consultation Paper CP08/22 ‘Strengthening
liquidity standards’ available at http://www.fsa.gov.uk/pubs/cp/cp08_22.pdf .
Financial Services Authority (2009) Discussion paper DP09/2: ‘A regulatory
response to the global banking crisis’ available at
http://www.fsa.gov.uk/pages/Library/Policy/DP/2009/09_02.shtml .
Financial Stability Forum (2009), ‘Report of the Financial Stability Forum on
Addressing Procyclicality in the Financial System’ April.
G20 (2009), ‘Declaration on strengthening the financial system’, London Summit 2
April.
Gai, P, Jenkinson, N and Kapadia, S (2007) ‘Systemic risk in modern financial
systems: analytics and policy design’, Journal of Risk Finance 8(2).
Gai, P and Kapadia, S (2009), ‘A Network Model of Super-Systemic Crises’, in
Alfaro, R and Gray, D (eds), Financial Stability, Monetary Policy, and Central
Banking, Central Bank of Chile Series on Central Banking, Analysis, and Economic
Policies, Vol. 14, forthcoming.
Gieve, J (2009) ‘Seven lessons from the last three years’ available at
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech377.pdf
Goodhart, CAE (2008) ‘Liquidity and Money Market Operations: A proposal’ LSE
Financial Markets Group Special Paper 179.
Haldane, A (2009a) ‘Why Banks Failed the Stress Test’, available at
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech374.pdf

20
Haldane, A (2009b) ‘Rethinking the financial network’, available at
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech386.pdf
Hamilton, R, Jenkinson, N and Penalver, A (2007) ‘Innovation and Integration in
Financial Markets and the Implications for Financial Stability’ in ‘The Structure and
Resilience of the Financial System’ (editors Kent, C and Lawson, J, Reserve Bank of
Australia) Pegasus Print Group, Sydney, Australia.
Heider, F, Hoerova, M and Holthausen C (2009) ‘Liquidity Hoarding and
Interbank Market Spreads: The role of counterparty risk’ forthcoming in the ECB
Working Paper series.
Jenkinson, N (2007) ‘Developing a Framework for Stress Testing of Financial
Stability Risks’ Speech at the ECB Conference on Stress Testing and Financial Crisis
Management in Frankfurt available at
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2007/speech318.pdf .
Jenkinson, N (2008) ‘Strengthening Regimes for Controlling Liquidity Risk: Some
lessons from the Recent Turmoil’ Speech at the Euromoney Conference on Liquidity
and Funding Risk Management available at
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2008/speech345.pdf .
Kerry, W (2008) ‘Measuring financial market liquidity’ Journal of Risk
Management in Financial Institutions, Vol 1 No2.
King, M (2007) Speech at the Lord Mayor’s Banquet for Bankers and Merchants of
the City of London at the Mansion House available at
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2007/speech313.pdf
King, M (2009) ‘Finance: A Return from Risk’ Speech to the Worshipful Company of
International Bankers at the Mansion House available at
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech381.pdf .
Morris, S., and Shin, H. S. (2004). ‘Liquidity Black Holes’ Review of Finance, 8(1),
1-18.
Perotti, E and Suarez, J (2009) ‘Liquidity Insurance for Systemic Crises’, available
at www.parliament.uk/documents/upload/EA44_PerottiEnrico20090220.pdf prepared
for testimony to the Select Committee for Banking Regulation and Supervision,
House of Lords, 24 February 2009.
Persaud, A (2008) ‘Regulation, valuation and systemic liquidity’, Banque de France
Financial Stability Review No12.
Renault, F, Bech, M, Beyeler, WE, Glass, R., and Soramäki, K (2008),
‘Performance and Resilience to liquidity disruptions in interdependent RTGS payment
systems, paper presented at the joint Banque de France/European Central Bank on
“Liquidity in interdependent transfer systems”, Paris, 9-10 June 2008 available at
http://www.banque-france.fr/fr/publications/seminaires/9juin_programme.htm .

21
Tucker, P (2009) remarks at Panel Session at The Turner Review Conference, The
Queen Elizabeth II Conference Centre, London, 27 March 2009 available at
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech384.pdf .
Turner, A (2009) ‘The Turner Review: A regulatory response to the global banking
crisis’, Financial Services Authority available at
http://www.fsa.gov.uk/pages/Library/Corporate/turner/index.shtml .
Van der End, W (2008) ‘Liquidity stress-tester: A macro model for stress-testing
banks liquidity risk’, De Nederlandsche Bank Working Paper No 175.
Warsh, K (2007a) ‘Market Liquidity: Definitions and Implications’, speech at the
Institute of International Bankers Annual Washington Conference, Washington DC,
5 March. Available at
http@www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2007/20070305 .
Warsh, K (2007b) ‘Financial Intermediation and Complete Markets’, speech at the
European Economics and Financial Centre, London, 5 June. Available at
http@www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2007/200706052 .
Webber, L and Churm, R (2007) 'Decomposing corporate bond spreads', Bank of
England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol 47, No. 4, pages 533-41.

22
CHARTS
Chart 1: Financial market liquidity(a)

Chart 2: Financial market liquidity(a)

Liquidity index
1.0

Liquidity index
1.0

0.6

0.6
+
0.2
0.2

0.2
+
0.2
-

0.6
1.0
1.4

0.6

1.8
2.2

1.0

2.6
3.0

1.4
92

92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 02 03 04 05 06

Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg, Chicago
Board Options Exchange, Debt Management Office,
London Stock Exchange, Merrill Lynch, Thomson
Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) The liquidity index shows the number of standard
deviations from the mean. It is a simple unweighted
average of nine liquidity measures, normalised on the
period 1999-2004. The series shown is an
exponentially weighted moving average. The
indicator is more reliable after 1997 as it is based on
a greater number of underlying measures.

94

96

98

00

Percentage of
total assets
(all currencies)
35

Cash ratio deposits
1981

Sterling stock
liquidity regime
1996

73

78

83

88

93

98

03

08

Avg UST / Assets 1970 - 1992

Percentage of
total assests
(all currencies)
16
14

30

12

25

10

20

8

15

6

10

4

5

2

0
68

06

Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg, Chicago Board
Options Exchange, Debt Management Office, London
Stock Exchange, Merrill Lynch, Thomson Datastream
and Bank calculations.
(a) The liquidity index shows the number of standard
deviations from the mean. It is a simple unweighted
average of nine liquidity measures, normalised on the
period 1999-2004. The series shown is an exponentially
weighted moving average. The indicator is more reliable
after 1997 as it is based on a greater number of
underlying measures.

UST / Assets

Competition &
credit control
1971

04

Chart 4: US banks holdings of Treasury
Bonds

Chart 3: Sterling liquid assets
relative to total asset holdings of UK
banking sector(a)
Broad ratio(b)
Reserve ratio(c)
Narrow ratio(d)

02

08

Source: Bank calculations.
(a) 2009 data are as of end-March 2009.
(b) Cash + Bank of England balances + money at call +
eligible bills + UK gilts.
(c) Proxied by: Bank of England balances + money at call +
eligible bills.
(d) Cash + Bank of England balances + eligible bills.

0
66 69 72 75 78 81 84 87 90 93 96 99 02 05 08
Source: FDIC Statistics on Depository Institutions.

23
Chart 6: Decomposition of sterlingdenominated high-yield corporate bond
spreads

Chart 5: UK banks' leverage ratio(a)(b)
Maximum-minimum range

Per cent
70

Interquartile range

3200

Co mp ensatio n fo r uncertainty ab o ut d efault lo sses

60

Median

Ba sis point s

Resid ual (includ ing co mp ensatio n fo r illiq uid ity)

3000

50

Co mp ensatio n fo r exp ected d efault lo sses

2800

Actual

2600
2400

40

2200
2000

30

1800
1600

20

1400

10

1200
1000

0

800
600

87 89 91 93 95 97 99 01 03 05 07 09

400

Source: Thomson Datastream, published accounts
and Bank calculations.
(a) Gross leverage measured by total assets divided
by shareholders equity minus minority interests.
(b) Due to the mergers and acquisitions of banks, the
chart includes data for the bank peer group as used in '
A new peer group to analyse large UK-owned banks
resilience over time', Financial Stability Review, Box
7, December 2004, page 68.

200
0
-200
98

00

01

02

03

04

05

06

07

08

Sources: Bloomberg, Merrill Lynch, Thomsom
Datastream and Bank Calculations.
(a) Webber, L and Churm, R (2007), 'Decomposing
corporate bond spreads', Bank of England Quarterly
Bulletin, Vol 47, No. 4, pages 533-41.
(b) Option-adjusted spreads over government bond
yields.

Chart 7: Illiquidity premia in sterling
and US dollar-denominated corporate
bond spreads(a)(b)
Illiquidity premia (c)
Full sample average
Average to end Jun 07

99

Basis points
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0

98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09
Sources: Bloomberg, Merrill Lynch, Thomsom Datastream
and Bank Calculations.
(a) Webber, L and Churm, R (2007), 'Decomposing
corporate bond spreads', Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin,
Vol 47, No. 4, pages 533-41.
(b) Option-adjusted spreads over government bond yields.
(c) Average of sterling and dollar IG/HY illiquidity premia,
weighted by market value of bonds outstanding.

09

