Covid-19 and the economy: what are the lessons so far?
Speech given by
Silvana Tenreyro
External Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England
London School of Economics webinar
15 July 2020

The views are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the Monetary Policy Committee. I would like
to thank Oliver Ashtari Tafti, Andrew Bailey, Thomas Belsham, Dario Bonciani, Robin Braun,
Cristiano Cantore, Federico Di Pace, Sinem Hacioglu, Jonathan Haskel, Elizabeth Levett, Clare Macallan,
Riccardo Masolo, Michael McLeay, Silvia Miranda-Agrippino, Kate Reinold, Martin Seneca, Tom Smith,
Neeltje van Horen and Jan Vlieghe for comments and input into this speech.

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

Introduction
It is great to speak at the LSE this morning, which, along with other universities and research centres in the
country, has been leading the social science and policy debate on the Covid-19 pandemic.
The scale and nature of the economic shock from Covid have been unlike anything policymakers in this
country or in any advanced economy have faced in recent memory. We have had to quickly adapt to a
rapidly changing situation, rethinking our assumptions as the data evolved and our understanding improved.
That understanding has been guided by interactions with researchers in central banks and universities, who
have contributed to a rapidly expanding body of analysis and modelling of Covid and its economic effects.
In my speech today, I will discuss some of the key insights I have taken from this research, and how it has
informed my policy views over recent weeks, and will continue to do so as we exit lockdown. I will also touch
on some of the many issues we still have to learn, so where more research is most urgently needed.
I will highlight three main points:


While the existing economic knowledge helped us to think about some aspects of Covid-19,
researchers have had to develop a variety of new ways to think about many other aspects. A vast
new body of research has sprung up in response to Covid, combining epidemiology with
macroeconomics. This is helping answer important policy questions about the interaction of the virus
and people’s behaviour; its economic effects; and the costs and benefits of different policies.



Behavioural responses mean that the UK economic outlook will continue to depend on the global
and domestic spread of Covid-19. Assuming prevalence gradually falls, my central case forecast is
for GDP to follow an interrupted or incomplete ‘V-shaped’ trajectory, with the first quarterly step-up in
Q3.1 We are already seeing indications of a sharp recovery in purchases that were restricted only
because of mandated business closures. But I think that this will be interrupted by continued risk
aversion and voluntary social distancing in some sectors, remaining restrictions on activities in
others, and in general, by higher unemployment.



At our June MPC meeting, I thought that on balance and absent additional policy stimulus, demand
would remain weaker than supply for some time, generating continuing disinflationary pressures. To
counteract those pressures and bring inflation back up towards our 2 per cent target, I voted to
loosen monetary policy by expanding the stock of asset purchases by £100 billion. As with the rest of
the committee, I remain ready to vote for further action as necessary to support the economy and
ensure inflation returns to target.

1

Whether a recovery looks ‘V-shaped’ of course depends on the scale: a V-shaped recovery in annual data may look ‘U shaped’ in
monthly figures. The initial step-up in activity is likely to begin in the period after the UK lockdown measures were relaxed.
2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

2

Past epidemics and crises
As the enormity of Covid’s effects on public health started to become clear in early 2020, policymakers had
to quickly think through the likely effects on the economy.2 A natural place to start was by looking at
comparable historical events. These offered a guide to how persistent the economic effects were likely to be,
as well as the specific mechanisms through which they would take place. At the same time, all crises are
different, and Covid-19 has had economic effects that have not neatly followed any historical precedent.
The global spread of Covid-19 bears some similarities to past health crises, particularly the 1918-1920 flu
pandemic. Despite some estimates suggesting that the 1918-1920 flu led to one of the largest economic
crises of the century (Barro and Ursúa, 2008), it had been relatively little studied by economists. One partial
reason is that it is not straightforward to isolate its effect on the economy, given its occurrence at the end of
the First World War.
New studies of the economic impact of the 1918-1920 flu have quickly emerged and helped inform us about
the possible persistence and size of the effects of Covid-19 and containment measures imposed. Barro,
Ursúa and Weng (2020) found that it led to a sharp decline in output and consumption in those countries
affected, with evidence that they did not fully recover, suggesting a persistent effect. Others have looked at
differences across cities or regions in lockdowns imposed in 1918-1920, generally finding that these had
large effects on activity or employment in the short run, but with conflicting results in the medium-term. 3
There are also important differences between the 1918-1920 influenza pandemic and the current situation.
The likelihood of deaths from the influenza pandemic was much higher for younger age groups relative to
Covid-19. Containment measures also differed. Although lockdowns were commonplace a century ago, they
were shorter and less strict than the ones we have just seen, without extensive business shutdowns. 4 Given
these differences, it was also instructive to examine more recent epidemics, even though these were less
widespread across countries than Covid-19.
Recent outbreaks that had received attention from economists included those of the coronaviruses SARS in
2002-04 and MERS in 2012, as well as the H1N1 ‘swine flu’ in 2009, and Ebola in 2014. 5 These epidemics
generally resulted in sharp downturns in the countries affected. Although consumption in sectors such as
travel and tourism was affected for some time, the recoveries in aggregate output were relatively rapid,
resulting in V-shaped trajectories towards the pre-outbreak trend. But these episodes represented a likely
lower bound for the effects of Covid-19, given their far more limited global spread and consequently lower
number of deaths (Ma, Rogers and Zhou, 2020). The MPC’s May MPR scenario lay somewhere between
2

See Tenreyro (2020a, 2020b, 2020c) for discussion of my views as the crisis evolved.
See Corriera, Luck and Verner (2020) and Lilley, Lilley and Rindali (2020) for the US, and Dahl, Hansen and Jensen (2020) for
Denmark.
4
See Hatchett, Mercher and Lipsitch (2007).
5
Assessments of the economic effects include Siu and Wong (2004) and Keogh-Brown and Smith (2008) for SARS, and Ma, Rogers
and Zhou (2020) for the other outbreaks.
3

3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

3

these extremes – the downturn was more persistent than those after recent epidemics, but less so than after
the 1918-20 pandemic.
Although past crises did not provide perfect comparators for the current episode, they were able to inform us
about the types of economic channels that were likely to take place. There had also been some efforts to
model the macroeconomic effects of public health crises, which could be calibrated to match some of the
health consequences of Covid-19 in the UK.6 On the supply side, these studies suggested that there were
likely to be reductions in labour supply for workers who were self-isolating, sick, or caring for others, in
addition to any business closures mandated by the government. Productivity was set to fall in the short-term
where changed working practices were less efficient, and in the long-term should any scarring take place
due to business failures or higher unemployment. Internationally, we anticipated that the shutdown of supply
chains would reduce capacity for production using imported intermediates.
On the demand side, uncertainty and confidence channels were likely to weigh on investment and
consumption. Even absent business closures, it was also likely that consumption demand would fall sharply
in social-consumption sectors such as tourism, hospitality and live entertainment, as quickly became clear in
some of the high-frequency indicators in February and March. The sharp global slowdown was also expected
to depress demand for UK exports.
With a range of channels affecting supply and demand, a crucial question for policymakers was whether
Covid-19 would generate inflationary or disinflationary pressures. This was difficult to judge purely from
historical precedents, for two reasons. First, the balance of demand and supply effects depends on the
nature of the health effects and the health policy response, which differ from previous epidemics. The labour
supply reduction owing to workers’ illness or mortality has been far lower than during the 1918-20 flu, for
example, and lockdowns were shorter and less strict.7 Second, the effect of past episodes on aggregate
demand and inflation depended on the monetary and fiscal policy response and regime at the time. To
cleanly identify the effect of the health crisis itself on inflation, we need to control for these responses.

6

At the start of the crisis, helpful existing studies included McKibbin and Sidorenko (2006), Keogh-Brown et al. (2009), Smith et al.
(2009), Verikios et al. (2016) and McKibbin and Fernando (2020). Since then a large amount of new literature has emerged exploring
different aspects of the crisis and its transmission to the economy, as discussed in the remaining sections of the speech.
7
On the demand side, precautionary reductions in consumption may have been expected to have been lower than viruses with higher
mortality rates, such as SARS or Ebola.
4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

4

1957-58 Flu

1918-20 Flu

1889-90 Flu

Third Plague

First Cholera
Second Cholera

Great Plague
of London

1592 London
Plague

1563 London
Plague

Black
Death

Chart 1: Annual UK CPI inflation, 5 year rolling averages, per cent

Per cent 20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10

1250 1300 1350 1400 1450 1500 1550 1600 1650 1700 1750 1800 1850 1900 1950 2000
CPI inflation
Years after pandemic started
Sources: Thomas and Dimsdale (2017); Jordà, Singh and Taylor (2020) and Bank calculations.
Notes: Red lines highlight the first eight years following the start of each pandemic or epidemic.

Those caveats aside, some recent research has attempted to use long-run historical data to assess the
impact of past pandemics on key macroeconomic variables. Jordà, Singh and Taylor (2020) use data from
pandemics going back to the Black Death to estimate the average impact on equilibrium interest rates. They
look at long-run impacts, which should be less susceptible to the impact of monetary policy, and find that
pandemics tend to reduce r* or the equilibrium interest rate. If Covid-19 has the same effect, it would imply
lower levels of interest rates than before would be consistent with meeting the inflation target. Forthcoming
work by Bank staff, using a similar method, uses historical inflation data from the UK (Chart 1) and seven
other countries to estimate the response of inflation to pandemics (Bonciani and Braun, forthcoming). The
results suggest that these episodes typically led to persistent declines in inflation (Chart 2).
Chart 2: Estimated response of inflation to a pandemic across 8 countries

Percentage points

4
2
0
-2
-4

90 per cent confidence interval
Inflation response
0

1

2

3
4
5
Years since pandemic started

6

7

-6
-8
8

Source: Bonciani and Braun (forthcoming).
Notes: Line represents local projections. Shaded areas are 90 per cent confidence bands. Countries included are the UK, Italy,
Germany, France, the Netherlands, Spain, Japan and the USA.
5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

5

Macroeconomics and epidemiology
As Covid-19 started to exert a massive impact on economies around the world, so economists have
responded by directing their research efforts towards its effects. A spate of new papers have added to our
standard macroeconomic models some of the key features from basic epidemiological models. These have
produced insights into how the health and economic effects of the virus were likely to interact, as well as on
the economic costs and benefits of different containment policies.
At their core, modern macroeconomic models contain firms that make decisions on employment, investment
and production, and individuals who make two key decisions: how much to work; and how much to spend or
save. The canonical (SIR) epidemiological model, simulates the spread of a virus by differentiating between
individuals who are susceptible (S), infected (I) and recovered (R) from the illness.8 The models include
assumptions, of varying degrees of complexity, governing how individuals move between the different virus
states. Over the past few months, new ‘Epi-Macro’ papers, influenced especially by Eichenbaum, Rebelo
and Trabandt (2020), have married together these two classes of models. In the combined Epi-Macro
framework, susceptible individuals consider the risk of becoming infected when choosing how many hours to
work and how much to consume. This modelling led to at least two sets of important insights for
macroeconomic policymakers.
The first important set of lessons was about the economic effects, costs and benefits of different virus
containment policies such as lockdowns. By modelling how individuals would behave absent any health
intervention, Eichenbaum, Rebelo and Trabandt (2020) are able to simulate the extra reduction in economic
activity from introducing lockdowns. In turn, however, reduced economic activity feeds back into slower
spread of the virus. Optimal government policy institutes containment measures that would slow near-term
economic output even more, generating a larger recession, in order to reduce virus contagion.
When lockdowns were implemented around the world, the modelling insights suggested that we should view
them differently from a normal recession, with some describing them instead as a one-off investment in
public health.9 As understanding of the virus has improved, other papers have modelled more complex
policies, where lockdowns or self-isolation is encouraged or mandated for some industries, age groups, or
combined with different testing strategies. See for example Acemoglu et al. (2020).10
The second important lesson was that even absent any public health containment policy, individuals would
voluntarily reduce their consumption and restrict labour supply. While the virus was transmitting widely,
individuals faced some risk of catching it when consuming (e.g., shopping or attending functions). Assuming
the infection risk could not be fully mitigated, one natural response to this, captured by the models, was to

8
9

Kermack and McKendrick (1927).
Bullard (2020).
See also Baqaee et al. (2020) and Glover et al. (2020).

10

6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

6

consume less. 11 The MPC included some of this ‘voluntary social distancing’ in the scenario in our May
report. The behaviour weighed on consumption and only gradually unwound over 2020 and 2021. In the
model, a similar mechanism applies to the labour supply decision, although in reality many workers do not
have the same flexibility to vary their working hours as their consumption spending.
Modelling by Bank staff illustrated how voluntary social distancing could affect consumption in the UK
(Cantore et al., forthcoming). Chart 3 shows their simulations of an epidemic, using model similar to
Eichenbaum, Rebelo and Trabandt (2020). The blue lines show the case where people continue working and
consuming as normal, despite the risk of infection. The red lines simulate what happens with mandated
containment measures, such as lockdowns, which lead to a reduction in infections and deaths. And the
yellow lines show how the economy responds with no official containment measures, but when people
respond to lower their own individual risk. Although stylised, the model simulations suggest that while
consumption falls most under an imposed lockdown, a large fraction of the decline may have occurred
anyway due to voluntary social distancing, even absent official measures. This scenario also results in fewer
infections than with no behavioural response, although more than under a lockdown. 12 The scenarios shown
here are V-shaped – by assumption, consumption and hours return to their previous trends. But variants of
the model can also explore more persistent voluntary social distancing or scarring effects.
Chart 3: Simulations from stylised ‘Epi-Macro’ model under different behavioural responses
(a) Consumption

(b) Hours worked
Percentage
change from
steady state

0

20

40

0
-5
No behavioural response
-10
-15
Voluntary social
-20
distancing only
-25
Mandated social
distancing (lockdown) -30
-35
60
80 100 120 140
Weeks

Percentage
change from
steady state

0
-5
-10
-15
-20
-25
-30
-35

0

20

40

60
80
Weeks

100

120

140

Source: Cantore et al. (forthcoming).

The effect of voluntary social distancing has been evident in some of the UK consumption data. 13 In the run
up to the UK lockdown at the end of March, retail footfall and various indicators of social consumption such
as restaurant bookings all fell sharply, even though businesses were still open at the time (Chart 4). As the
lockdown ends, the extent to which this behaviour weighs on consumption again is a key uncertainty for the
11

Some versions of the models capture the fact that some purchases can still be made online, but for others this is difficult or
impossible, as I discussed in Tenreyro (2020c).
12
See also Céspedes, Chang, and Velasco (2020) for a model of this trade-off.
13
It has been less clear that it has had a large effect on the labour market. Average hours worked have fallen to a series low, but
evidence from the Bank’s Agents suggest this is due to enforced falls in labour demand, rather than active choices by workers
themselves.
7

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

7

MPC. Since lockdown measures have begun to be lifted, we have seen consumption pick up in sectors
where risks of catching the virus are small. But even after the reopening of many businesses, the early signs
are that social consumption is not recovering as quickly (Chart 5). Indeed, even within social spending, the
limited pickup so far has been partly down to substitution towards businesses able to offer products that
involve less contact.
Chart 4: Restaurant bookings

Chart 5: CHAPS spending

Percentage change relative
to a year ago

Restaurants
close

Restaurants
reopen
United Kingdom

Percentage change on Jan-Feb 2020

0

40
-20

20

Staples

0

-40

-20

Aggregate
-60

Work-related -40

Delayable

London

-60

-80

-80

Social
-100

Mar 20

Apr 20

May 20

Jun 20

60

Jul 20

Source: OpenTable.
Notes: Seated diners at restaurants from online, phone and walkin bookings.

-100
Mar 20

Apr 20

May 20

Jun 20

Jul 20

Source: Bank of England and Bank calculations.
Notes: CHAPS data are based on a sample of around 100 UK
companies’ payments received from their merchant acquirers on a
daily basis. These payments reflect the sales that companies
make through debit and credit card purchases, which are summed
to estimate rolling seven-day revenues. For definitions of the
different consumption groups see the May 2020 MPR. Data
shown to July 8.

Consumer behaviour is difficult to predict, especially in response to extreme or rare events such as the
current crisis. Both imposed lockdowns and voluntary social distancing cause reductions in activity, but both
are also more likely to take place when Covid 19 is more prevalent in the community. Disentangling these
effects is tricky. One useful way of gauging their relative size is to compare across regions, since the virus
has spread and lockdowns have been introduced or relaxed at different times in different places. Using US
real-time data, Chetty et al. (2020) show that consumer spending evolved very similarly in different US
states, irrespective of when they decided to lockdown, and whether they decided to reopen (Chart 6). Using
mobile phone data on US shopping trips, Goolsbee and Syverson (2020) find that legal restrictions explain
only around one-tenth of the reduction in retail footfall, with individual choices explaining the vast majority.

8

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

8

Chart 6: Real-time consumer spending data before and after reopening in US states
Percentage change since Jan 2020
Reopening

0
-5
-10
-15
-20

Early reopening states

-25

Control group

-30
60

50

40

30

20

10

0

-10

-20

-30

-40

-50

-60

-70

-80

-35
Days since reopening in early reopening states
Source: Chetty et al. (2020) and Bank calculations.
Notes: Simple average of seasonally-adjusted percent change in real-time measure of consumer spending in states that partially
reopened businesses between April 20th and May 4th and in a matched control group, as identified in Chetty et al. (2020).

Covid-19 and distributional issues
One of the most striking aspects of the economic effects of Covid-19 is how uneven they have been. In order
to comprehend these effects, we need to understand well its impact on people consuming from, and working
in, different industries and occupations. To do so we need to use models with, in the economics jargon,
heterogeneity.
In the past, macroeconomic research had been criticised for often assuming away important distributional
issues. Fortunately, there has been much progress introducing heterogeneity into macroeconomics over the
past couple of decades, partly enabled by advances in computing power, as I previously discussed in a
speech in 2018.14 Entering the Covid-19 crisis, economists were therefore well prepared to explain and
predict many of its key effects. I would pick out three areas in which there have been important insights from
these literatures.
First, models of multiple sectors told us that although the direct effects of Covid-19 on output were
concentrated in some industries, these could lead to large spillovers in other sectors. 15 Even if the initial
reduction in output was due to falls in supply, these second-round spillovers would affect aggregate demand,
making it likely to fall more than aggregate supply. Guerrieri et al. (2020) model this phenomenon explicitly:
when there are multiple sectors, reductions in supply in some sectors, for example due to business closures,
lead to falls in income for their employees. This causes a subsequent reduction in demand for goods

14

Tenreyro (2018).
Even within industries, the shock may have heterogeneous impacts on different firms, given their starting balance sheet positions.
See van Horen (2020) for a summary of the literature on the factors affecting firms’ ability to withstand the shock.
15

9

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

9

produced in unaffected sectors.16 The fall in demand can be larger than the initial fall in supply, which is not
the case when all sectors are affected equally. In a different setting, Baqaee and Farhi (2020) use a
multi-sector model with a detailed input-output structure to present scenarios in which the ‘omnibus of supply
and demand shocks’ lead to spillovers across different sectors. 17
In the UK data, we saw sharp enforced falls in consumption during the lockdown, but for most categories of
consumption, these have now largely unwound. On the face of it, this might suggest that the spillovers to
consumption from falls in income have been small in practice. However for most workers, by far the largest
potential fall in income arises if they are made unemployed. And although a great number of workers have
unfortunately already lost their jobs, many others have been able to maintain much of their income during the
crisis via the government’s Coronavirus Job Retention Scheme. The likelihood of large spillovers to
aggregate demand will depend strongly on the outlook for the labour market over the coming quarters.
A second insight relates to the fact that job losses and income reductions are likely to fall disproportionately
on low-income households. Since they tend to spend a larger share of their income, this could have greater
subsequent effects on spending for those households than if the losses had been spread more equally, even
if the implications for aggregate consumption may not be as large. Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2020) model
how low income, low wealth households suffer the worst economic consequences from the virus and
containment policies. Hacioglu, Känzig and Surico (2020) present UK data showing that the percentage falls
in income have been largest for more economically vulnerable groups.
Chart 7: GDP and remote working by sector, ordered by average weekly earnings
Mining & quarrying
Finance & insurance

Percentage fall
in GVA

Highest
wage

Information and communication
Electricity, gas and water supply
Professional services
Manufacturing

Share ever worked
from home

Transport and storage
Construction
Real estate activities
Administrative services
Other service activities
Agriculture, forestry and fishing
Wholesale and retail trade
Arts, entretainment & recreation Lowest
Accomodation & Food

-100

-50

0

wage
0

20

40

60

16

There is also a more direct negative effect if goods in the unaffected sectors are complements with the products in the affected ones.
Baqaee and Farhi (2020) argue, using a quantitative model, that the disinflationary pressures so far in the US data are consistent with
a mixture of both aggregate supply and demand shocks. With only supply (demand), more extreme inflation (deflation) would have been
likely. Brinca, Duarte and Faria-e-Castro (2020) attempt to empirically identify the balance of labour demand and supply shocks in each
sector in the US, and find about two-thirds of the fall in hours were due to falls in labour supply.
17

10

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

10

Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
Notes: Left hand panel shows change in monthly GDP between December 2019 and May 2020, for each of the mainly market sectors
(A-N, R and S). Right hand panel shows the share of the sector that had ever worked from home in 2019, according to that ONS annual
population survey. Sectors are ordered by Average Weekly Earnings including bonuses in the April 2020 Labour Market Statistics.

The reasons low-income households have been more affected relate to some of the other distributional
issues. Many service-sector industries, such as hospitality, where the risk of spreading Covid-19 is thought to
be higher, are also relatively low wage. Since these industries have faced stronger imposed or voluntary
social distancing measures, they have generally suffered greater than average losses in output from the
Covid crisis (Chart 7). These have also been the industries where firms have furloughed the largest shares
of their employees using the Coronavirus Job Retention Scheme. Some of the worst hit sectors are those in
which working from home is difficult or impossible, which is likely to have amplified some of the disparities
(Chart 7). They are also sectors with higher female employment shares, which may lead to greater job
losses among women than men.18
A third important distributional concern in the current crisis arises because Covid-19 leads to quite different
health outcomes for different age-groups. These differences need to be taken into account when considering
the amount of voluntary social distancing that is likely to take place. For example, younger age groups are
likely to cut consumption less than older ones if they take into account their lower risks from the virus. This
might reduce the amount of voluntary social distancing, and therefore increase the incremental impact of
lockdowns on spending. Several papers have also suggested that a better balance between maintaining
economic activity and reducing the spread of the virus may be possible with containment measures and
incentives targeted by age.19 For example, Argente, Hsieh and Lee (2020) find that in South Korea, policies
that disclosed detailed location data of Covid cases reduced foot traffic in neighbourhoods in which they lived
or had travelled.20 Using these findings in their SIR model suggests that such policies could reduce case
numbers with a lower economic cost than lockdowns, although this must be weighed against costs from loss
of privacy. The economic gains come from encouraging self-selection into voluntary social distancing among
demographics and in locations where risks are highest.
Outstanding issues
Drawing on the latest economic research, policymakers have learnt a great deal about the effects of
Covid-19 over the past few months. But there remain many uncertainties and unanswered questions. 21
Making progress towards answering them will likely be a two-way process, with policymakers taking lessons
from the latest research, and researchers learning from practical policy decisions and their impact. There are
a few areas where I think we still have much to learn, and which in my view should be a near-term priority.

18

See Alon et al. (2020), who also discuss how women appear to have been disproportionally affected given higher demands in the
household, including childcare and home schooling. They also suggest that there may be some offsetting longer-term effects that
promote gender equality, such as a shift towards more flexible work arrangements.
19
Acemoglu et al. (2020) and Glover et al. (2020).
20
Location data was collected from contact tracing, as well as mobile phone and credit card records.
21
These questions relate not only to the economics of Covid, but also to the epidemiology of the virus, on which the economic effects
will depend.
11

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

11

Many of the macroeconomic studies I have discussed have been theoretical, but as the data comes in, we
will need to continue to test and validate different hypotheses. By necessity, the initial findings on Covid-19
came largely from modelling work, as well as insights from similar historical episodes. Since official data are
published with a lag, economists and statisticians also quickly adapted, making use of new real-time data
sources.22 As the data continue to come in, it will be essential to keep devising empirical strategies to identify
the effects of the virus and improve our understanding of different containment measures.
Interpretation of the aggregate data will be complicated by various practical and conceptual difficulties.
Standard empirical techniques for analysing and forecasting macroeconomic time series may become less
appropriate in the face of such extreme movements in the data, although economists are already coming up
with ways to address these challenges.23 On the data side, I have previously discussed the many difficulties
affecting CPI inflation measurement and interpretation. 24 Elsewhere, data on average wages and productivity
will be skewed by large compositional effects, since layoffs are likely to be concentrated in low-wage sectors
with low measured productivity.
For monetary policymakers, one of the most important issues to understand will be any changes in the
transmission of policy brought about by Covid-19. We already know that the role of monetary policy in
meeting the remit was quite different from usual during the lockdown period. With many businesses closed
owing to public health policy, no amount of expansionary monetary policy could boost activity in those
sectors. An unusually large part of the transmission of interest-rate policy was instead aimed at mitigating
cash-flow difficulties by lowering borrowing costs and providing liquidity.
As the economy opens up, we will need to understand the extent to which monetary (as well as fiscal) policy
is still able to boost demand as normal. Even as legal restrictions on businesses are removed, it may be that
voluntary social distancing hinders the ability of policy to increase activity in some sectors, and potentially in
aggregate. Guerrieri et al. (2020) and Baqaee and Farhi (2020) both find that aggregate demand policy
injects less stimulus than usual after negative sectoral shocks in their models. My own conjecture is that
some of the sectoral changes we are seeing could limit the usefulness of empirical estimates of the
aggregate transmission mechanism, including relationships such as the aggregate Phillips curve.
A closely related question is what, in an ideal world, optimal economic policy should do. For the MPC, the
answer is straightforward – we will strive to meet our mandate by achieving the 2 per cent inflation target. For
broader economic policy, research can tell us, in the context of an economic model with given assumptions
on societal preferences, what might be optimal for welfare. The answers may depend on whether some of
the changes in behaviour and attitudes toward risk that we have seen are temporary or permanent. If
transitory, policies that return the economy as close as possible to its pre-crisis path may be preferable. If
permanent, then policies will instead need to facilitate the transition to new patterns of demand and supply.
22
23
24

See the recent speech by Haldane (2020) and references therein.
See Lenza and Primiceri (2020) and Primiceri and Tambalotti (2020), for example.
Tenreyro (2020c).
12

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

12

The current outlook
Turning back to monetary policy, the challenge for the MPC is to assess how Covid-19, the lockdown, and its
subsequent easing will interact to determine the outlook for demand, supply and inflation. The MPC will be
publishing its collective view in August, but ahead of that, I would like to set out my own thinking, including
the reasons behind my vote in June to expand our asset purchase programme by a further £100 billion.
The latest monthly GDP data suggest we are on track for a reduction of nearly 25% in 2020 Q2, relative to
the 2019 Q4 peak. This still looks to be less severe than in the illustrative scenario the MPC published in
May, but I do not read too much into the precise figure – neither its absolute weakness, nor the downside
surprise in the latest monthly data. Activity was extraordinarily weak during the lockdown, but a large part of
this was a direct consequence of business closures and other public health restrictions. The scale of the
GDP fall largely reflects the timing and the extent of lockdown measures, and the same will be true for the
initial step in the recovery in output as businesses reopen. For purchases that were constrained only by the
lockdown, we should initially see a relatively ‘V-shaped’ jump in activity beginning in Q3.
The key uncertainty is how much the ‘V’ will be interrupted by other factors weighing on demand and supply.
Two near-term ones stand out. First, the possible feedback from higher unemployment, particularly in some
badly affected sectors, to lower aggregate demand, and if persistent, to lead to greater scarring. Second,
effects of voluntary or mandated social distancing on demand and supply in social consumption sectors.
The imminent rise in the unemployment rate was not yet visible in the official labour market data for April, but
more timely indicators suggest it will soon be visible in the headline numbers. Vacancies have dried up and
the employment survey balances are consistent with a sharp fall in employment in the rest of Q2, even if they
cannot reliably inform us about its scale (Chart 8). Higher unemployment in some sectors is likely to feed in
to lower demand for goods and services produced in others, especially if layoffs are concentrated in
households less able to borrow to continue spending. Unemployment would already be far higher if it were
not for the sizeable uptake of the Coronavirus Job Retention Scheme. But the latest indications from the
Bank’s Agents suggested a further risk that many furloughed workers would not be reabsorbed into
employment as the scheme is wound down. Recent large-scale redundancy announcements are consistent
with this, although the new Job Retention Bonus may mitigate the risk for some workers.
The persistence of higher unemployment will partly depend on how long voluntary and mandated social
distancing weigh on activity. On the demand side, as the lockdown is eased, I expect voluntary social
distancing to continue to drag on consumption in sectors where the perceived risk of spreading Covid-19
remains high, such as hospitality and travel. Recent survey data suggests a majority of people would still be
uncomfortable going to indoor restaurants or cinemas, for example (Chart 9). For goods and services
involving social interaction, evidence from other countries suggests that a key determinant will be the actual
prevalence of the virus. The effects of voluntary social distancing will therefore depend on whether case
13

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

13

numbers continue to decline. Assuming they do, there is still likely to be some lag between confirmed cases
and perceived risks, although behaviour could also be affected by recent fiscal measures to boost social
consumption spending. On the supply side, there could be negative effects on productivity in some
occupations. These could stem from mandated social distancing, which may reduce the amount that can be
produced in a given space; or from remote working being less efficient for some workers.25
Chart 8: Employment survey balances

Net percentage
balances

BCC

Chart 9: Survey on going to restaurants/cinemas

40
20

0

-20

REC

Uncomfortable

-40

Neither comfortable nor
uncomfortable

-60

Comfortable

-80

Very comfortable

Going to the cinema
Eating indoors at a restaurant
Eating outdoors at a restaurant

-100

2017

2018

2019

2020

Source: BCC, IHS Markit/CIPS, KPMG/REC Report on Jobs and
Bank calculations.
Notes: BCC (employment expectations over the next three
months), IHS Markit/CIPS (PMI composite employment index) and
KPMG/REC (index of demand for new staff). All series are
monthly, except BCC which is quarterly.

50

Very uncomfortable

0

PMI

Percentages of respondents
10
20
30
40

Source: ONS.
Notes: Survey taken July 2 to July 5. Question: At this time, how
comfortable or uncomfortable would you be about eating indoors
at a restaurant?

On balance, these uncertainties suggest to me considerable downside risks for demand relative to supply.
The global outlook remains weak, given the continued spread of the virus around the world and especially its
resurgence in the US. This global picture, together with significant uncertainty and a subdued outlook for
consumption will all serve to drag on business investment. Last but not least, the risk of a second wave
domestically or abroad brings additional uncertainty into the outlook. Highly supportive fiscal policy will make
government spending the main offsetting component of GDP.
Putting this demand outlook together with the pre-existing weakness in core inflation, we are likely to see
disinflationary pressures for some time. Headline inflation will continue to weaken in the near term, given a
continuing sizeable impact from lower energy prices, and a negative contribution from the recent cut in VAT.
Although these effects on headline inflation should prove temporary, in order to use up spare capacity and
bring inflation back to target, policy needs to continue to support aggregate demand through the crisis. This
should also benefit the supply-side of the economy, by acting to offset business failures and persistently high
unemployment, which would ultimately feed through into lower potential output. Although fiscal policy is
providing significant support to the economy and to individual workers and sectors, monetary policy also has
a role to play to try to maintain aggregate demand in line with supply and ensure price stability.
25

See Haskel (2020) for a detailed discussion of this point, also suggested in Tenreyro (2020c) and in the May MPR.
14

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

14

In June I therefore voted with the majority of the MPC to increase our stock of asset purchases. Lower gilt
yields and higher asset prices induced by QE will lead to some aggregate demand stimulus, although the low
prevailing level of the yield curve may reduce the impact somewhat, relative to some of the MPC’s previous
asset purchase announcements. As with the rest of the committee, I remain ready to vote for further action
as necessary to support the economy and ensure inflation returns to target.

15

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

15

References
Acemoglu, D, V Chernozhukov, I Werning and M D Whinston (2020), “Optimal Targeted Lockdowns in a
Multi-Group SIR Model,” NBER Working Paper No. 27102.
Alon, T M, M Doepke, J Olmstead-Rumsey and M Tertilt (2020), “The Impact of COVID-19 on Gender
Equality,” NBER Working Paper No. 26947.
Argente, D O, C-T Hsieh and M Lee (2020), “The Cost of Privacy: Welfare Effect of the Disclosure of
COVID-19 Cases,” NBER Working Paper No. 27220.
Baqaee, D and E Farhi (2020), “Nonlinear Production Networks with an Application to the Covid-19 Crisis,”
NBER Working Paper No. 27281.
Baqaee, D, E Farhi, M Mina and J Stock (2020), “Evaluating the economics and epidemiology strategies
for reopening the economy,” Harvard University Working Paper.
Barro, R and Jose F Ursúa (2008), “Macroeconomic Crises since 1870,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, vol. 39, pp. 255-350.
Barro, R, Jose F Ursúa and J Weng (2020), “The Coronavirus and the Great Influenza Pandemic: Lessons
from the “Spanish Flu” for the Coronavirus’s Potential Effects on Mortality and Economic Activity,” NBER
Working Paper No. 26866.
Brinca, P, J B Duarte and M Faria-e-Castro (2020), “Measuring Sectoral Supply and Demand Shocks
During COVID-19,” FRB St. Louis Working Paper No. 2020-011.
Bonciani, D and R Braun (forthcoming), forthcoming Bank Underground Post.
Bullard, J (2020), Interview with Bloomberg, available at https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-0322/fed-s-bullard-says-u-s-jobless-rate-may-soar-to-30-in-2q.
Cantore, C, F Di Pace, R Masolo and S Miranda-Agrippino (forthcoming), forthcoming working paper.
Céspedes, L F, R Chang, and A Vélasco (2020), “Macroeconomic Policy Responses to a Pandemic”,
Working Paper.
Chetty, R, J N Friedman, N Hendren, M Stepner and The Opportunity Insights Team (2020), “How Did
COVID-19 and Stabilization Policies Affect Spending and Employment? A New Real-Time Economic Tracker
Based on Private Sector Data,” NBER Working Paper No. 27431.
Correia, S, S Luck and E Verner (2020), “Pandemics Depress the Economy, Public Health Interventions Do
Not: Evidence from the 1918 Flu,” Working Paper.
Dahl, C M, C W Hansen and P S Jensen (2020), “The 1918 epidemic and a V-shaped recession: Evidence
from municipal income data,” CEPR Covid Economics.
Eichenbaum, M, S Rebelo and M Trabandt (2020), “The macroeconomics of epidemics,” NBER Working
Paper No. 26882.
Glover, A, J Heathcote, D Krueger, JV Rios-Rull (2020), “Health versus wealth: On the distributional
effects of controlling a pandemic,” NBER Working Paper No. 27046.
Goolsbee, A and C Syverson (2020), “Fear, Lockdown, and Diversion: Comparing Drivers of Pandemic
Economic Decline 2020,” NBER Working Paper No. 27432.
Guerrieri, V, G Lorenzoni, L Straub and I Werning (2020), “Macroeconomic Implications of COVID-19:
Can Negative Supply Shocks Cause Demand Shortages?” NBER Working Paper No. 26918.
16

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

16

Hacioglu, S, D Känzig and P Surico (2020), “Consumption in the time of Covid-19: Evidence from UK
Transaction Data,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 14733.
Haldane, A (2020), “The second quarter,” speech delivered online, available at
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2020/andy-haldane-the-second-quarter-webinar
Haskel, J (2020), “Remarks on Covid-19 and Monetary Policy,” speech hosted by the Brighton Chamber of
Commerce via Zoom, available at https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2020/jonathan-haskel-brightonhove-chamber-of-commerce
Hatchett, R J, C E Mecher and M Lipsitch (2007), “Public health interventions and epidemic intensity
during the 1918 influenza pandemic,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America, vol. 104, no. 18.
Kaplan, G, B Moll and G Violante (2020), “Pandemics according to HANK,” Working Paper.
Kermack, W O and A G McKendrick (1927), “A Contribution to the Mathematical Theory of Epidemics,”
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, series A, vol. 115, no. 772.
Keogh-Brown, M R and R D Smith (2008), “The economic impact of SARS: how does the reality match the
predictions?” Health Policy, vol.88, no. 1.
Keogh-Brown M, S Wren-Lewis, W J Edmund, P Beutels and R D Smith (2009), “The Possible
Macroeconomic Impact on the Economy of an Influenza Pandemic,” University of Oxford Department of
Economics Discussion Paper Series No. 431.
Jordà, O, S R Singh and A M Taylor (2020), “Longer-run Economic Consequences of Pandemics,” NBER
Working Paper No. 26934.
Lenza, M and G Primiceri (2020), “How to Estimate a VAR after March 2020,” Working Paper.
Lilley, A, M, Lilley and G Rinaldi (2020), “Public health interventions and economic growth: Revising the
Spanish flu evidence,” Working Paper.
Ma, C, J H Rogers and S Zhou (2020), “Modern Pandemics: Recession and Recovery,” Working Paper.
Markel, H, H B Lipman and A Navarro (2007), “Nonpharmaceutical Interventions Implemented by US Cities
During the 1918-1919 Influenza Pandemic,” JAMA.
McKibbin W and R Fernando (2020), “The Global Macroeconomic Impacts of COVID-19: Seven
Scenarios,” Working Paper.
McKibbin and A Siderenko (2006), “Global Macroeconomic Consequences of Pandemic Influenza,”
Working Paper.
Primiceri, G and A Tambalotti (2020), “Macroeconomic Forecasting in the Time of COVID-19,” Working
Paper.
Siu, A and R Wong (2004), “Economic Impact of SARS: The Case of Hong Kong,” Asian Economic Papers,
vol. 3, no. 1.
Smith, R D, M R Keogh-Brown, T Barnett and J Tait (2009), “The economy-wide impact of pandemic
influenza on the UK: a computable general equilibrium modelling experiment,” BMJ 339:b4571.
Tenreyro, S (2018), “Models in macroeconomics” speech delivered at the University of Surrey.

17

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

17

Tenreyro, S (2020a), Remarks given at a panel discussion at the 2020 US Monetary Policy Forum, available
at https://www.chicagobooth.edu/-/media/research/igm/events/usmpf/2020/silvana-tenreyro-remarks-for2020-mpf-panel.pdf.
Tenreyro, S (2020b), Annual Report for the Treasury select Committee, available at
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/2020/march/silvana-tenreyro-annual-report.
Tenreyro, S (2020c), “Monetary Policy during pandemics: inflation before, during and after Covid-19,”
speech delivered online.
Thomas, R and N Dimsdale (2017), "A Millennium of UK Data", Bank of England OBRA dataset, available
at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/Pages/onebank/threecenturies.aspx
van Horen, N (2020), “Covid-19 Briefing: Corporate Balance Sheets”, Bank Underground post, available at
https://bankunderground.co.uk/2020/06/09/covid-19-briefing-corporate-balance-sheets/
Verikios, G, M Sullivan, P Stojanosvski, J Giesecke and G Woo (2016), “Assessing Regional Risks From
Pandemic Influenza: A Scenario Analysis,” The World Economy.

18

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

18

