Credit Conditions and Monetary Policy
Speech given by
Paul Tucker, Executive Director and Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of
England

At the Leeds Financial Initiative
28 August 2003

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2

CREDIT CONDITIONS AND MONETARY POLICY
Many thanks to the Leeds Financial Services Institute for the opportunity to speak to
you today. Many thanks also to Mark Pratt, the Bank of England's Agent or
Yorkshire and the Humber, for helping to arrange today's event. Perhaps I can take
this opportunity to pay tribute to the work of the Bank's Agents around the country,
whose contributions to UK monetary policy I have certainly come to appreciate in the
year or so I have been on the Monetary Policy Committee. The Agents play a vital
role in ensuring that the Committee does not drift away from the real-world
experience of businesses operating in the economy. We are really very grateful for all
the help that you and other contacts around the country give to Mark and his
colleagues.
Your group - comprising local bankers, brokers, fund managers and advisors - is
especially appropriate for exploring my view of one particular dimension of the
challenges currently confronting monetary policy here and abroad: the interactions
between the financial economy and the real economy.1 Those challenges are not
immediately apparent from most headline economic forecasts, or indeed from the
Monetary Policy Committee's own central projections. Broadly, our August Inflation
Report has the UK economy operating at pretty close to potential over the next few
years, and inflation close to the 2½% target. And just below those main headlines, we
have growth in both the US and the Euro area recovering strongly - to trend, in fact so that, from a UK perspective, net trade moves from subtracting from output growth
to broadly neutral. That, along with some recovery in business investment and
sustained robustness in government spending, helps to fill a gap prospectively left by
a projected slowdown in consumer spending growth - leaving, as I said, aggregate
demand broadly in line with supply.
That apparently benign story belies some complex risks not too far beneath the
surface. Assessing many of them calls for an examination of financial market:real
economy interactions, especially in the US and the UK. Since that is where a central

1

With many thanks to Fergal Shortall and Peter Andrews; to Colin Miles, Alex Bowen and David Rule
for continuous discussions over recent years on financial conditions and risk; and to Michelle Morris
and Jane Jones for secretarial support.

3

bank's monetary policy and financial stability missions meet, it should be familiar
territory. In fact, the route by which we got here has been anything but familiar.
To recap: since the summer of 1996, net trade has persistently reduced output
growth. Quite apart from the effects of the pound's 25% appreciation in the mid-'90s,
over the past three years or so this has also been down to a series of adverse shocks to
world economic growth. Faced with that, UK interest rates have been progressively
reduced - from 6% in February 2001 to 3.5% now - to support domestic demand
growth. Since 1996, annual consumption growth has averaged over 4% - well above
trend. And it has remained stronger than expected, as underlined by last Friday's data
for Q2, which estimated quarter-on-quarter consumption growth at 1.3%. This has, of
course, been accompanied by rapidly rising debt. Stimulating demand has worked
nicely in terms of keeping inflation broadly in line with the 2½% target. The question
has been whether there are limits to a strategy of a small, open economy seeking to
offset adverse developments from overseas that are well beyond its control.
Answering that question in the abstract is straightforward: yes. Of course there is a
limit: for example, it would make no sense to induce households or firms in aggregate
to accumulate debt beyond their means. The subsequent balance sheet adjustment
would complicate the operation of monetary policy in ways that are hard to
anticipate. It will not do to argue that faced with such retrenchment, the Bank could
reduce interest rates, since we do not know very much about how much purchase
monetary policy would have in such circumstances. Rather than elaborate on that
today - except to say that the possibility of complicating the future operation of policy
should be weighed - I want instead to trace through just a few of the practical
challenges in assessing those risks. In doing so, I want to stay faithful to the interests
of this audience. So I will focus on household and corporate balance sheets in the US
and the UK, and on the financial conditions they face.
Financial conditions in the US
There can be no apology for spending time on the US economy. It has been centre
stage, and remains so. Of course, the Euro area accounts for a greater share of UK
trade. But with domestic demand there - especially in the three largest continental

4

economies - anaemic, which is a subject for another day, global prospects and
financial market confidence continue to depend disproportionately on the US.
But the US continues to work through the legacy of the late '90s. Buoyed by evidence
of a fairly remarkable improvement in measured productivity growth, based at least in
part on efficiency gains from the new technologies, investment and equity prices
boomed from the mid-90s. Many of the ill-fated dot.com ventures were equity
financed. But across the economy as a whole, equity was retired (net), and much of
the investment boom was in fact financed by debt (see Chart 1): telecom is just the
most infamous example. Capital gearing (valuing assets at replacement cost) and
income gearing rose.
Household borrowing accelerated too. At one level, this all made sense. On a benign
view, companies and households, taken in aggregate, were simply borrowing against
the higher future incomes that higher trend productivity growth appeared to promise.
With overall national saving below investment, the external counterpart was a
growing US current account deficit. But with demand for US assets supported by a
belief in high prospective returns, the dollar rose. That broadly was the story until the
party ended in the early months of 2000.
US corporate sector adjustment
From their high point in March 2000 to a low point roughly three years later, world
equity markets fell by almost 50%. For US businesses, the subsequent slowdown in
demand had two direct implications. They were carrying excess capacity, and too
much debt. But the indirect effects were as potent. The darker underside of the boom
years began to become apparent in a series of corporate scandals, denting confidence
in published accounts and business ethics generally. While the number of business
bankruptcies had up to that point only ticked up slightly, the value of defaults reached
record levels following the scandals (see Chart 2). Some banks announced large
credit losses. Borrowing conditions deteriorated. According to the Federal Reserve's
quarterly Senior Loan Officer Survey, bankers had already been tightening lending
conditions - in some cases following recognition that loan underwriting standards,
especially for leveraged loans, had been overly relaxed in 1997/98. Debt-market
investors now started to focus on corporate liquidity risk, concluding that there was

5

over-reliance on short-term debt. For a while, there was a generalised retreat from
risk.
This heady cocktail could be seen in market indicators of corporate credit risk: the
spread of corporate bond yields over risk-free bond yields rose, for all ratings. By the
autumn of 2002, the atmosphere in credit markets was febrile, with anxiety briefly
even affecting some well-capitalised financial sector firms.
Against this background, it is perhaps not surprising that corporate boardrooms throughout the industrialised world, but perhaps especially in the US - focused on two
main objectives: better governance and strengthening their balance sheets.
The latter is easier to measure. Although pressures remain in some sectors, US
balance sheets have been strengthened somewhat. Commercial and industrial
companies have for a while been repaying bank loans. And there has been a
significant extension of debt maturities, reducing any incipient liquidity risks,
although there has not been much change in total debt relative to equity (at
replacement cost) (see Chart 3). Debt-servicing obligations are down relative to
operating profits, although that is probably unremarkable given the sharp reductions
in dollar interest rates. One concrete diagnostic of the market's view is the substantial
fall in credit spreads since last autumn. No doubt that partly reflects some unwinding
of an overshoot then, and some market participants believe that this year spreads have
overshot on the downside, reflecting a so-called 'search for yield' in an environment of
low nominal returns from government bonds and uncertainty about future equity
returns.2 But it is striking that credit spreads have not risen with the recent sharp
increase in government bond yields. And the most recent Senior Loan Officer Survey
suggested that fewer domestic banks were tightening credit conditions. So I am
inclined to take a degree of encouragement that market perceptions of credit risk have
improved somewhat this year.
Gauging the temperature in corporate boardrooms about governance is more difficult;
it is probably not even the kind of thing that our statistical models can track.
Although only indirect evidence, some mild encouragement can probably be taken

2

See June 2003 Financial Stability Review, pages 11 and 15-17.

6

from stirrings in the mergers and acquisitions market in the US, although M&A does
not equate to capital expenditure. And I would guess that the recovery in equity
markets since March will help to buttress boardroom confidence. More concrete was
the reported rise in business investment in Q1 and the improvement in business
surveys. But we will need to see more hard evidence of an investment recovery in the
official data before concluding that the corporate sector's problems are behind us.
US household sector financial conditions
The key question, of course, is whether business investment will stage that recovery
before US household consumption decelerates. The most tangible threat to household
spending has come from adjustment by the corporate sector itself: cost cutting. Over
2½ million jobs have been lost since February 2001, and unemployment has risen
from 3.9% to 6.2% on the latest reading. Perhaps ironically, given the unusual
strength of productivity growth during the economic slowdown, businesses have not
needed to add to the workforce in order to meet growth in demand. Consumer
confidence surveys suggest that there is anxiety about job prospects. But so far at
least, this does not seem to have had much effect on aggregate consumer spending,
although there must surely be a downside risk looking ahead if labour market
conditions continue to deteriorate.
What explains the robustness in consumption, bearing in mind that, reflecting lower
equity prices, US household financial wealth is 25% lower than 3 years ago? Most
obviously, the substantial easing in monetary policy. That has probably supported
housing market conditions. House prices have risen by around 7% per year on
average over the past three years, and mortgage equity withdrawal has risen sharply
(see Chart 4). Households have also been refinancing their mortgages on a record
scale. This has been made possible by the distinctive features of the US mortgage
market: namely, the prevalence of long-maturity fixed-rate mortgages with a prepayment option that enables households, for relatively small transactions costs, to
lock into lower debt-servicing costs as long-term mortgage rates fall.
Bond yields reached a low in June, having fallen pretty well steadily for over 3½
years. Most of that decline was simply a reflection of cuts in official interest rates as
the economy slowed, coupled with a growing market expectation that they would

7

remain low for a prolonged period. It is not obvious, however, that expectations of
the path of short-maturity rates can explain the sharp drop in medium-to-long-term
yields around the middle of this year. But as a borrower, you don't much care why
your mortgage rate has fallen, and so many American households were able to
refinance at record low mortgage rates.
Recently, US mortgage rates have risen by about 1 percentage point. On some
estimates, that has reduced the proportion of mortgages that can profitably be
refinanced from around 90% in June to under 20% now. Of course, if bond yields
stay where they are or even if they were to rise further, probably millions of US
households will have locked in exceptionally low financing costs. Other things being
equal, that will have strengthened their cash flows and balance sheets, against a
background of record debt-to-income levels; debt-to-net worth having shot up
following the fall in equity prices; and a historically high debt-servicing burden. Such
balance sheet strengthening would tend to support the economy going forward. To
the extent, though, that households took out more debt when refinancing their old
debt, their balance sheets may not have been strengthened. We will not know until
we see the Federal Reserve's Q2 Flow of Funds data in September. What we can be
more confident of is that, given the substantial recent rise in bond yields, the US
economy is now less likely to enjoy extra injections of demand from mortgage
refinancing. Cumulative rises in house prices across the nation will, though, probably
provide scope for continuing mortgage equity withdrawal going forward.
The US fixed-rate mortgage market
Given the important role that mortgage financing has played in this US cycle, and the
debate in this country about fixed-rate mortgages, it is worth pausing at this point to
pick out two consequences of the distinctive structure of the US market: the volatility
and complexity of dollar interest-rate markets, and the path dependency of part of the
monetary transmission mechanism.
First, US bond yields are more volatile than bond yields in other industrialised
countries (see Chart 5), because of the US financial sector's need to manage its

8

interest-rate exposures.3 The right to repay early enjoyed by US mortgage borrowers
is a financial option, i.e. a derivative. The option writers - largely owners of
mortgage-backed securities (MBS) - need to hedge their exposure to the probability of
exercise of the option, the value of which changes as market yields move closer to or
away from the interest rate charged on the underlying mortgages. The US household
sector is on one side of this option - in the jargon, households are 'long'; and the US
financial sector is on the other side, or 'structurally short'. But the household sector
does not otherwise participate materially in the interest-rate options market, so
financial firms are left to sort out their risk management problem without a complete
hedge being available for the sector as a whole. Precisely what they need to do
depends on the interest-rate structure of their liabilities relative to that of their assets.
And that is affected by a peculiar property that the prepayment option gives to US
mortgage-backed bonds.
For normal bonds, when yields fall, their price rises; and the greater the rate at which
yields fall, the greater the rate of increase in the bond's price. It is the opposite for US
mortgage-backed securities (at least across a certain yield range, where the
prepayment option is 'close to the money'). This is referred to as having negative
convexity.4 Indeed for some mortgage products, the price of the security falls as
yields fall! In the absence of a complete hedge for the financial sector, mortgage
investors are left having to hedge the risks arising from option prepayment
dynamically, which means that they continuously adjust other elements of their bond
and derivatives portfolios as yields fluctuate. In very broad terms, this involves the
following. As bond yields fall, a faster pace of mortgage pre-payment typically
reduces the average maturity of the expected cash flows from mortgage assets relative
to a firm's liabilities, prompting them to buy medium-to-long maturity fixed-rate
securities in order to rebalance their asset-liability mismatch. When the amounts
concerned are very large, as they can be since the US mortgage market is very large
and mortgage investors have similar positions, these bond purchases can push yields
down still further, reducing mortgage rates and triggering more pre-payments etc. So

3
4

See June 2002, Financial Stability Review, pages 36-37 and 70-72.
For an explanation of convexity, see page 72, June 2002 Financial Stability Review.

9

convexity hedging tends to reinforce, or exaggerate, falls in bond yields. The same
applies in reverse.
Most commentators agree we saw precisely that recently when dollar bond yields
ticked up. The initial trigger was probably an improved perception of the US
economic outlook accompanied by changed expectations of the path of FOMC rates
and possibly reduced expectations of 'unconventional' monetary policy in the future
(ie of the Fed buying long-maturity bonds to increase the supply of base money). But
the violence of the move was down to so-called mortgage convexity hedging. (An
independent diagnostic is provided by a very sharp widening in swap spreads –
broadly, the spread between the fixed rate at which banks borrow and the rate at
which the US government borrows. That is because a lot of the hedging was effected
via the swaps market; as MBS-holders found themselves with more medium-long
maturity fixed rate assets than expected, they will have entered into swaps
transactions to pay fixed and receive floating-rate streams of cash.) This is a pretty
sophisticated business, which complicates risk management in dollar interest rate
markets, as the Bank has for some time discussed in various Financial Stability
Reviews.5
A second implication of the structure of the US mortgage market concerns the way in
which monetary policy is transmitted. Crucially, it makes the transmission
mechanism path dependent. By that, I mean that for any small change in medium-tolong-term yields brought about by, say, changed perceptions of the path of monetary
policy, the impact on consumption will depend on where the level of current mortgage
rates is relative to the distribution of historical mortgage rates being paid by existing
borrowers. So, for example, once US mortgage yields had reached near record low
levels during 2002, any further falls were likely to bring forth a lot of refinancing. In
fact, mortgage rates fell to progressively lower record levels, and it seems that some
households did indeed refinance twice or more as borrowing costs fell. But US
mortgages are long maturity loans, so if yields were to back up a long way, small falls
thereafter would have little or no effect on the probability of the existing stock of

5

See, for example, page 16 of the June 2003 issue.

10

mortgages being refinanced, making incremental small falls in yields a less potent
part of the monetary transmission mechanism.
Neither of these features of the US mortgage market is inherently good or bad,6 but
they are the kind of thing that I am sure will be considered in depth in the review of
the structure of the UK mortgage market commissioned by the Government from
Professor David Miles.
UK financial conditions
Changes in the supply of credit to households
Although the structure of the UK market is different, there have been important
changes in the availability of finance to households. Most obviously, the fixed-rate
mortgage market has grown, especially for 2 and 3 year mortgages. Over 50% of new
mortgage borrowing this year has been at fixed rates. Reflecting changes in money
market rates, the cost of such mortgages fell in the early months of the year, but has
risen more recently. Other things being equal, I view that as a loosening followed by
a tightening of credit conditions, which I took into account in my votes in February
and July/August. Given that this market is still relatively new, I am not sure that our
econometric models fully capture its influence on household finances and spending.
We may be able to revisit that as a longer time series becomes available.
If access to fixed-rate mortgage finance has increased, that probably owes something
to the more stable macroeconomic environment and to increased liquidity in the swap
market. These developments reduce the risks to banks of carrying fixed-rate assets on
their balance sheets and increase their ability to hedge any consequent interest-rate
risk in the money markets.

6

This account has abstracted from who are the main investors in MBS, which is another distinctive
feature of the US market. Part of the impetus for securitisation comes from mortgage originators not
wanting, or being able, to manage the embedded interest-rate risk. Unlike in the UK, mortgage
origination, servicing (collecting the interest and principal repayments) and investment are unbundled.
Securitisation is facilitated by - although it is not clear to what extent it depends on - mortgage credit
risk being homogenized via guarantees from so-called government-sponsored agencies. The largest
such agencies (Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac) are not guaranteed by the Federal Government, although
the credit markets perhaps behave as if they were. They are amongst the largest holders of the MBS
that they guarantee.

11

Greater stability in the economy, and in particular the much reduced risk of lurching
from boom to bust, has probably also helped to foster increased competition in
consumer credit markets by reducing fears of exaggerated cyclical rises in defaults.
The spread on the interest rates charged on credit card and personal loans over 'base'
rate has been drifting down since the mid-1990s (see Chart 6). In the mortgage
market, it has become easier to negotiate new terms and cheaper to unlock housing
equity. That may help to explain the rise in the share of gross mortgage advances
accounted for by re-mortgaging; from around 20% a few years ago to nearly 50%
now.
UK household sector balance sheet
Those more or less structural changes in the supply of credit have been occurring
during a period in which borrowers and lenders have also been adjusting to a low
inflation-low nominal interest rate environment, and during which official interest
rates have been cyclically low. The upshot has been lots of borrowing. Some
commentators have tended to focus on the degree to which the household sector has
been in financial deficit, ie the extent to which investment in housing has exceeded
savings out of income or, equivalently, to which the accumulation of debt has
exceeded the acquisition of financial assets. But this measure of household financial
flows cannot provide an adequate basis for assessing risk, which depends on the
household sector's overall balance sheet - a stock concept. Where the flow data can
help is in tracking the extent to which households are adjusting, eg whether or not the
sector is moving back towards surplus to strengthen its balance sheet.
One way of thinking about the household sector's balance sheet is to draw on a
framework used to assess the risk of company default;7 it is no more than an analogy,
since households may be more credit constrained than companies and the analysis of a
sector is different from the analysis of an individual borrower, but I think it is
potentially illuminating. For a company, the risk of default depends, in broad terms,
on three variables: the value of its assets, ie the net present value of its future income

7

See Merton, RC (1974), 'The pricing of corporate debt', Journal of Finance, Vol 29, No 2, May,
pages 449-470; and Tudela M and Young, G, Bank of England 'Predicting default among UK
companies; a Merton approach', Financial Stability Review, June 2003, pages 104-113.

12

streams minus its costs; the variability of its asset value; and the amount of debt it
carries. In the current context, the key point is that the greater the volatility of a firm's
asset value, the more likely it is to default for any given level of debt. So, conversely,
the risk of default is reduced if the volatility of the value of the borrower's assets is
reduced. Something broadly analogous to that may have happened to the UK
household sector taken as a whole.
The improved policy regime progressively put in place since the early 1990s is
designed to deliver greater macroeconomic stability. During the 1970s and 80s,
inflation was not only higher on average, it was also considerably more variable. In
consequence, nominal interest rates were highly variable. But not only that. Real
interest rates were also more variable than now, as the economy swung from boom to
bust. A benefit of the current regime should be that households are less likely to have
their balance sheets torpedoed by rocketing official interest rates as the authorities
belatedly struggle to correct past policy mistakes. In parallel, changes in the real
economy seem to have brought about a gradual reduction in the sustainable level of
unemployment. That, taken together with a more efficient labour market more
generally and a lower risk of boom-bust, may have helped to improve job security. If
household finances - and, in particular, their cash flows - have become less volatile
for these or other reasons, then households can probably prudently carry more debt
than in the past.
Stepping away from that framework, households' capacity to carry debt will also have
increased to the extent that they can substitute from expensive unsecured debt to
cheaper - because, for the lender, less risky - secured debt, on account of the rise in
house prices and increased availability of secured lending products.8 Given the
continued robustness of unsecured borrowing, it is difficult to know whether such
'debt consolidation' is material; anecdotally it is.

8

See Aoki, K., et al. (2002), House prices, consumption and monetary policy: a financial accelerator
approach, Bank of England working paper no. 169, for a more formal treatment. The key reference in
this area, for the corporate sector, is Bernanke, B., et al. (1999), "The financial accelerator in a
quantitative business cycle framework", in Taylor, J and Woodford, M. (eds.), The Handbook of
Macroeconomics Vol. 1, North Holland, Amsterdam.

13

No doubt reflecting each of these factors in varying degrees and also simply that
houses cost more today, households have increased their debt. The sector's debt-toincome ratio has risen 25 percentage points over 5 years, to record levels. The
difficulty is knowing how much is safe, or how much is too much. Nobody is going
to be able to answer that with confidence for the sector as a whole, and it would be
dishonest to pretend that I can.
There are two quite different ways into the question. One is to ask whether the
household sector might exceed its budget constraint, ie borrow more than it will be
able to repay from its expected future incomes. Some commentators suggest that this
is prima facie unlikely since households would have to be 'irrational' in order to find
themselves in that position. Although I do not think that is terribly likely on an
aggregate scale, I would not completely rule out that scenario, as complete sectors can
find themselves forming mistaken expectations about the future. The developments I
described earlier in the US corporate sector in the mid-to-late 1990s may provide an
example; large US corporates are hardly unsophisticated. Another is the UK
household boom the late '80s: while aided and abetted by policy mistakes, borrowers
and lenders were not forced to behave as they did. The current risk - rather less
dramatic than those two examples - is that households, and conceivably lenders,
extrapolate forwards two features of the past few years. The first would be to assume
that real personal disposable incomes will continue to grow as rapidly (see Chart 7).
It is unlikely that they will. Recent years were unusual as household spending power
was buttressed by a fall in the price of imported consumer goods and services relative
to our exports. And going forward, disposable income growth will be reduced by the
increase in National Insurance contributions and, most likely, by employment
growing less rapidly than over the past decade. The second risk is that it will not be
appreciated that the current low level of debt-servicing costs, and possibly also the
record low level of mortgage arrears (see Chart 8), owes something to official interest
rates needing to be set below their likely long-term average level in order to support
the economy. I do not think we have the data to assess those various risks
quantitatively. Probably the best we can do is to talk about them. Ultimately it
depends on individual households, and their lenders, reaching their own view in the
light of their particular circumstances.

14

Even if households are not affected by either of those possible misperceptions, more
debt unavoidably leaves them more vulnerable to bad luck, eg adverse economic
shocks. Returning to my analogy with firms, this is saying no more than that a highly
geared borrower is exposed to more risk than a borrower with low gearing. Bankers
emphasise that significant household sector defaults have in the past occurred only in
the face of a rise in unemployment and a rise in interest rates. And, of course, in the
past the monetary authorities managed to produce precisely that potent combination
by allowing inflation to get out of control to the point where a sharp rise in interest
rates was required, effectively pushing the economy into recession, with a consequent
loss of jobs. That seems considerably less likely today. Even though we have had
very rapid house price inflation, that has not been accompanied by rising consumer
price inflation, which on the contrary has stayed close to the 2½% target.
For me, one worry has rather been that the economy would suffer a supply shock - say
a large rise in oil prices - that was expected to persist and had the effect of dislodging
medium-term inflation expectations away from the 2½% target. In those
circumstances, the MPC might not be able to reduce interest rates to offset the
demand effects of the shock, and might conceivably even have to raise them. It was
therefore a relief that the risk to oil markets from the Iraqi war passed without that
kind of event, which I believe remains a low probability. (I shall return to the vital
importance of inflation expectations in concluding.)
If increased debt entails increased risk for households, a key question is whether they
- rather than the monetary authority - have the wherewithal to manage it. Setting
aside their ability to cut back on spending/increase saving, that depends on whether
they can draw on a pool of liquid assets and on whether they have surplus collateral
that they could pledge to lenders in the face of adverse developments.
The sector's liquidity position is, frankly, ambiguous. On the one hand, taken as a
whole, households' liquid assets appear to be high relative to income and relative to
scheduled debt-servicing payments (see Chart 9). On the other hand, liabilities have
been growing rapidly relative to liquid assets (see Chart 10). Those aggregate data
do, of course, mask considerable variation across households. Analysis of what little
disaggregated data we have suggests that more-heavily indebted households do not

15

carry more liquid assets than the less indebted, although the latest data are now three
years old.9
By contrast, subject to one important proviso, the collateral position is clear. The
sector has a lot of 'equity' in housing against which it has not borrowed (see Chart
11). And even for new mortgage business, loan-to-value ratios do not seem to have
increased as they did in the late-1980s. So there appears to be a cushion that, relative
to past cycles, may well increase the capacity of households to smooth their
consumption.
The proviso, of course, is whether or not house prices will hold. I do not want to get
into that today, other than to make three observations. First, the current regional
variation in house price inflation is quite striking, with the market still apparently
robust in parts of the North of England and Wales (see Chart 12). In previous cycles and notably so in the late-1980s - house prices in London and the South East rose
strongly before prices elsewhere. Prices outside the South East belatedly shot up,
only to be squashed as official interest rates were ratcheted up to slow down the
economy and restrain general price inflation. This time round the possible process of
'catch up' outside London is not being dampened by moves to a contractionary
monetary policy. This is another novel feature of the current cycle - the first we have
been through since the 1997 change in the monetary regime.
Second, although it has been coming out slightly stronger than assumed in the MPC's
central projections, house price inflation in the country as a whole has slowed down
since last year. It is too early to conclude that it is reaccelerating or that adjustment is
not taking place. Third, there seems to be less immediate risk of severe weakness in
house prices. The surveys of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors have not
proved terribly good predictors of house price inflation, but they do plausibly give a
reading on the mood in the country about downside risks. The balance of estate
agents expecting prices to rise has moved from -47 in March to +14 on the most
recent reading (July).

9

See Pru Cox, John Whitley and Peter Brierley, 'Financial pressures in the UK household sector:
evidence from the British Household Panel Survey', Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Winter 2002.

16

Earlier in the year, my own view was that, relative to our then central projections, the
balance of risks to house prices was on the downside; but that if those risks receded,
the balance of risks to consumption was on the upside on account of the greater
capacity of households to absorb adverse shocks to their income - ie to smooth their
consumption over time - by increasing secured borrowing, effectively mortgage
equity withdrawal. I believe that the downside risks to house prices have since
receded, but certainly not disappeared, and that the risks to consumption are (slightly)
to the upside, even after the Committee agreed a higher central projection for
consumption in August.
UK corporate sector adjustment
The UK corporate sector could hardly have been in a more different position from
households over recent years. In contrast to strong household income growth,
corporate profitability has been under pressure - across almost all sectors, but
especially so in manufacturing, which since the mid-90s has been adversely affected
by sterling's strength and weakening external demand (see Chart 13). At an aggregate
level, that has not stood in the way of debt accumulation (see Chart 14). But given
the imbalances in the economy, it is misleading to look at aggregate data.
Fortunately, plenty of disaggregated data are available - for individual firms,10 and by
type of business. For example, much of the recent increase in bank debt has been in
the real-estate sector. But, again in contrast with the household sector, the data on
bank borrowing are not sufficient to get a clear picture, as many public companies
make extensive use of the capital markets to raise external finance.
Given the challenges in interpreting the raw data in this area, the Bank has for some
years been holding six-monthly 'credit conditions' meetings with the major banks - in
the run up to the May and November Inflation Reports and the June and December
Financial Stability Reports - covering both corporate and household sector lending.
This talk has drawn on those meetings, which I lead, working with colleagues from
the monetary and financial stability teams in the Bank.

10

Benito, A., and Vlieghe, G., (2000) "Stylised facts on UK corporate financial health: evidence from
micro-data", Financial Stability Review, June, is one such study.

17

It has been clear from these discussions that competition for middle-market corporate
loan business is fairly intense, perhaps partly reflecting mergers in the UK banking
sector. Indeed, conditions in this market have occasionally seemed independent from
those in public bond and wholesale loan markets, which have been more affected by
the global developments - and so at times by the reduced risk appetite - that I
described earlier.
But if they have escaped the generalised tightening of credit conditions prevailing in
US banking markets over the past few years, UK companies have, nevertheless,
needed to adjust given earnings (outside the oil sector). For example, an increasing
proportion of dividend-paying companies have cut dividends (see Chart 15). And
manufacturing companies have, in aggregate, been repaying bank debt (net) in recent
years, as well as cutting jobs. Indeed, hours worked have fallen across the private
sector as a whole, although it is difficult to gauge how much that reflects employee
preferences and how much financial pressure on businesses.
Perhaps reflecting these various steps, while it remains high by historical standards,
capital gearing (measured on a replacement cost basis) has come off its 2001 peak,
and most measures of sectoral liquidity appear strong. The insolvency rate remains
low.
So, compared with the US, it is not obvious therefore that balance sheet pressures, or
governance concerns, do as much to explain the persistent weakness in capital
expenditure here. It seems just as plausible that many businesses have simply
deferred investment in the face of uncertain demand prospects, including externally,
and uncertain profitability. The MPC's August central projection has a gradual
recovery in business investment. There are risks on either side of this. In the near
term, it may well remain weaker than projected while the outlook for demand remain
uncertain, but it could increase more sharply than assumed once demand palpably
improves and deferred projects are brought on stream. The timing, though, is
anyone's guess, so that the central projection is a sensible 'average' of different states
of the world.

18

Credit conditions, money and inflation expectations
Much of this talk has revolved around credit conditions. I have concentrated on the
US and UK, although credit conditions would be central to any analysis of Japan, and
integral to most analyses of the euro area.
An observer at the Bank of England's briefings for the Monetary Policy Committee,
and any reader of the minutes of our meetings, would indeed find that we have been
devoting more time to credit than to money. And the emphasis has shifted since the
1980s, when bank lending was analysed as a counterpart to broad money (the assets
that back banks' deposit liabilities). The stress now is rather on credit conditions as an
identifiable element of the monetary transmission mechanism in their own right; one
that often requires us to use analytical models alongside market intelligence on what
is going on.
Some commentators would not be surprised by this, on the grounds that since the
Bank of England (and other central banks) implement monetary policy by setting the
price of base money (the official interest rate), its quantity is endogenous; and that the
quantity of broad money is also demand determined. On that view, there is no
incremental information from the monetary data; they merely have the advantage of
being available early and of rarely being revised. There are perhaps at least two
drawbacks with this account. First, it seems overly simplistic to assume that, in terms
of financial prices, money demand is determined just by a two-week risk-free interest
rate and expectations of its future path. It is surely more likely that money demand
turns on a whole host of relative asset prices, ie not just on the risk-free rate set by the
monetary authority but on relative risk premia too.11 But we cannot observe risk
premia and do not understand much about how and why they vary over time. So
interpreting the monetary data remains an important challenge.
Second, and rather more importantly, credit conditions as I have discussed them - eg
credit spreads to compensate for risk, balance sheet robustness - are real rather than
nominal economic variables. But inflation - the focus of monetary policy - is a

11

This way of thinking about money dates back at least to Brunner and Meltzer's work from the 1960s
onwards, summarised in 'Money and the economy; issues in monetary analysis', the 1987 Raffaele
Mattioli Lectures.

19

nominal, or monetary, variable. Although successful monetary policy relies on
keeping aggregate demand in line with aggregate supply, that leaves the steady-state
inflation rate indeterminate as it is consistent with any stable rate of nominal
expansion. The assessment of the inflation outlook cannot depend on real indicators
alone, credit conditions included. Effective policy also relies on keeping mediumterm inflation expectations in line with the 2½% target; and the credibility of policy
is, therefore, itself the nominal anchor. That underlies the Bank of England's attention
to measures of inflation expectations, which are derived from the difference between
nominal and real (ie, strictly RPI-indexed) bonds and tracked by a battery of surveys.
So long as inflation expectations are so anchored, we can afford to focus on the
balance of real demand and supply. But that expectations do appear to have been
anchored should not seduce us into ignoring monetary (or nominal) barometers.
Analysis of credit conditions is a complement to that, not a substitute for it. Credit
conditions feed into the assessment of prospective demand pressures, and into
gauging how any policy changes will be transmitted in the economy.
If the distinct role of nominal magnitudes and expectations is one vital point about the
operation of policy, a second is the priority of getting the 'sign' of policy right. By
that I mean that we are stimulating (or restraining) spending in the economy when we
mean to. Our de facto instrument for doing so is the short-term real-interest rate, ie
the short-term nominal interest rate adjusted for expected inflation. Given that prices
- and so expectations of short-term inflation - are sticky, we can more or less control
the short-term real rate by setting the nominal interest rate in the money markets. By
moving the short real rate above or below its 'natural' rate, we can bear down on or
stimulate demand12 depending on the policy stance we wish to adopt given the
outlook for inflation. So it is crucial to be able to gauge whether the short-term real
interest rate has moved in the direction intended. Like lots of interesting and
important economic variables, the 'natural' real interest rate cannot be directly
observed and may itself vary in the face of demand or supply shocks. But on an

12

This analysis goes back to Wicksell's Interest and Prices (1898) and Lectures on political economy,
volume II: money (1906).

20

assumption that such variation is small,13 reasonable proxies exist, including the longrun average ex post real rate and the yield on long-maturity indexed-linked gilts.
Right now, and over the past couple of years, policy has, as intended, been
accommodative on this measure. And judging by the price of short-maturity yields
relative to long-maturity yields on inflation-linked bonds, policy is expected by the
market to remain supportive for a while longer - but perhaps less so than expected a
few months ago. The shift probably reflects an improved view of the outlook over
recent months (see Chart 16).
In reaching month-by-month decisions, it is important to place some weight on simply
getting the sign right! In that way, we should be able to avoid big policy mistakes.
Conclusion
To conclude, the world economy remains delicately poised, with risks on the upside
and downside relative to the MPC's August central projection. For some of those
risks the assessment of credit conditions and sectoral balance sheets plays an
important role. I have focused on that today rather than a broad overview of the
outlook.
Against the background of central projections in which growth in both the US and the
euro area return to trend from well below, I place the balance of risks to external
demand for UK goods and services on the downside, in the near-term at least. In the
US, because of the burden of adjustment - financial and, for want of a better term,
cultural - on corporate America, I will not feel confident about a recovery in business
investment spending until I see it in the data. Once it begins, though, I believe that it
could be quite pronounced given the deferral of projects over the past couple of
years. Meanwhile, there may be downside risks to US consumption - from continued
labour shedding and from higher mortgage rates - although arguably balanced by the
effects of substantial monetary and fiscal stimulus. The race between US investment
and consumption remains unresolved. In the euro area, which I have not discussed
today, I again see the near-term risks on the downside, partly because of the risks to

13

See Neiss, K., and Nelson, E., (2001) The real interest rate gap as an inflation indicator, Bank of
England working paper no. 130.

21

global demand and partly because domestic demand prospects remain clouded by
structural issues and a still-evolving macroeconomic policy framework.
If I continue to see the balance of risks to external demand for UK goods and services
on the downside in the near-term, I see upside risks to UK domestic demand, viz
consumption, also in the near-term. In particular, there is the possibility that
households will borrow more against their homes in order to shield themselves against
decelerating disposable incomes, although the recent rises in fixed-rate mortgage rates
may dampen that somewhat.
That leaves UK monetary policy finely poised. At the MPC's August meeting, I was
one of those who explored arguments for a rise, as well as those for a further cut,
before concluding that 'no change' was the best place to be given the outlook for
inflation.
But, given the debate about household debt, it is worth bearing in mind that the
current level of short-term interest rates is most likely below their long-term average,
so that personal finances would prudently be managed on the basis that rates are likely
to be somewhat higher on average in the medium term. It is impossible to say when;
we set rates a month at a time, and policy is rightly now supporting demand in order
to keep inflation on track to meet the 2 ½% target.
Meanwhile, I am clear that the Committee will continue to need, as a matter of
routine, to assess indicators of credit conditions and to draw on intelligence from the
financial community, alongside the various other macroeconomic indicators, to which
I can turn another day.

22

Chart 1:
Sources of corporate finance(a)
Percentage of GDP
Inward foreign
direct investment

Net debt issuance

6

(c)

5
4
3
2
1
+
0
1

Net equity issuance

2

Financing gap (b)

3

1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002
Source : Board of Governors of the Federal reserve system:
'Flow of Funds Accounts of the United States', 2002 Q4.
(a) Data are annual.
(b) Capital expenditure less the sum of US sourced internal
funds and inventory valuation adjustment.
(c) Loans, bonds and commercial paper.

Chart 2:
Business bankruptcy filings
Per cent(a)
2.5
2.0

Enron(LHS)
Conseco(LHS)
Per cent(b)
Worldcom(LHS)
0.030
Other(LHS)
Number of filings(RHS)
0.025
0.020

1.5

0.015
1.0

0.010

0.5

0.005

0.0

0.000
1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002

Sources: Thomson SDC Platinum, International Monetary
Fund, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System:
'Flow of Funds Accounts of the United States', 2003 Q1 and
Administrative Offices of US Courts.
(a)
Chapter 11 filings as a percentage of total assets of nonfinancial companies at historical cost.
(b)
Total business filings as a percentage of total population.

+

23

Chart 3
Capital and income gearing of non-financial
corporate sector
Per cent

70
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20

Income gearing

Capital gearing
at market prices

Capital gearing at
replacement cost
1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System:
'Flow of Funds Accounts of the United States', 2003 Q1 and
Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce.

Chart 4
Mortgage equity withdrawal by the US
household sector(a)
Per cent of personal disposable income
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
1961 1967 1973 1979 1985 1991 1997 2003
(a)
Four quarter moving average of secured lending to the
household sector less housing investment.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal reserve system:
'Flow of Funds Accounts of the United States', 2003 Q1.

24

Chart 5
Three-month historical volatility of 10-year
government bond yields
Annualised basis points
160
United States
140

United
Kingdom

120
100
80
60
40
20

Germany

0
1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Source : Bank of England

Chart 6
Interest rates for unsecured credit
Per cent
Quoted credit card rate

25
20
15

Interest rate on £3,000 personal loan

Bank of England repo rate

10
5
0

1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
Source: Bank of England

25

Chart 7
Household real post tax income and consumption
percentage change on a year earlier
8
Consumption

6
4
2
0
Real post tax
income

-2
-4

1993
1995
Source : ONS

1997

1999

2001

2003

Chart 8
UK-resident financial institutions' arrears on UK
mortgage lending(a)
Percentage of total loans
2.5
Six to twelve months in arrears
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
Over twelve months in arrears
0.0
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
Source : Council of Mortgage Lenders.
(a)
UK-resident financial institutions are those banks, building
societies and other lenders who are members of the CML and
who, together, undertake around 98% of all residential mortgage
lending in the UK.

26

Chart 9
Household liabilities relative to liquid
financial assets(a)
Per cent
80

Per cent
125

Household liabilities
as per cent of deposits,
bonds and shares
(LHS)

75
70
65

120
115

60
55
50

110

Household
liabilities as per cent
of deposits (RHS)

45
40

105

35
100

30

1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003
Sources : ONS and Bank of England.
(a)
Data are not seasonally adjusted.

Chart 10
Household M4 liquidity measures(a)
Per cent
90

Number of quarters
45

88
86

40
35

84
82

30
25

80
78
76
74
72

Liquidity relative to
repayments
(RHS)(c)

Liquidity relative to
income (LHS)(b)

20
15
10
5
0

1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003

Source : ONS and Bank of England.
(a) Liquid assets are defined as household M4 holdings.
(b) Liquid assets divided by household disposable income.
(c) Liquid assets divided by quarterly interest payments and
regular mortgage principal repayments.

27

Chart 11
Undrawn housing equity (a)

Per cent
85

80

75

70

65

1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

Sources: ONS and Bank of England.
(a) As a percentage of total housing wealth.

Chart 12
Annual regional house price inflation
North
Yorks. and Hum'side
East Midlands
Wales
North West
West Midlands
South East
South West
UK
East Anglia
Outer London
Scotland
Inner London
Northern Ireland
5 10 15 20 25 30 35
percentage change on a year ago
Source : Nationwide

60
2003

28

Chart 13
Net rate of return on capital
per cent
20
18

(net operating surplus/net capital employed)

16
14
12

services

total

10
8
6
4

manufacturing

2
0
1990 1992
Source : ONS

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

Chart 14
PNFCs' capital and income gearing(a)
Per cent
Net debt/capital stock
(market valuation
measure)(b)

Interest payments/
pre-tax profits

50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10

Net debt/capital stock
(replacement cost)(c)
1980

1985

1990

1995

5
0
2000

Sources: ONS and Bank of England.
(a) Seasonally adjusted.
(b) PNFCs' net debt divided by the sum of net debt and their
market valuations.
(c) PNFCs' net debt divided by the total value of capital at
replacement cost.

29

Chart 15
Dividend payers with 2002 accounts
reducing their dividend(a)

Per cent
25
20
15
10
5
0

75

79

83

87

91

95

99

Source: Thomson Financial Datastream.
(a) 2002 data contains 1108 accounts, approximatley 90% of the
expected final number.

Chart 16
UK short versus long-maturity
forward real interest rates

Percentage points
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0

market rs-rl

22 August

0.5
0.0
-0.5

12 June

-1.0
-1.5

Jul
1998

Jul
2000

Jul
2002

Jul
2004

Jul
2006

Jul
2008

