Press Conference - 28th August 2013

Page 2
Press Conference

Facilitator:

Welcome everyone to this short press conference. I wonder if
you could just make sure that you do identify yourselves and your
organisation before asking a question, because we’ve got the TV
cameras here and I'm sure everybody wants to know who you are.
So it’s one question at a time. Who’s got their hand up first? Well
let’s take the question in the front row, right here.

Rebecca Barry, Channel 5 News:

We spoke to a businessman in Nottingham this morning who
says his bank would have preferred to see him go bust than
reduce his loan repayments. What promises can you give him,
and other businesses, that banks are on their side?

Mark Carney:

Way to go Rebecca. Well I spoke to a number of businesses in
Nottingham today, and the general sense is that credit conditions
of banks are improving somewhat. There are still big pockets
where people aren’t served, small and medium sized enterprises
aren’t served, and there are issues with terms and covenants and
the like. But there's a direction of travel which would be
consistent with what we see in the macro figures, is that there is
some improvement on the margin.

Look, I'm not going to give promises about individual institutions
or individual businesses. What I will reconfirm is that in our
prudential responsibilities of the Bank, both micro and
macroprudential, so for individual institutions and for the
economy as a whole, is that we’ll make sure that our major and
minor institutions are adequately capitalised, that they have
appropriate liquidity, and that they’re focused on the real
economy. And that process has been substantially advanced by
the work of my predecessor and colleagues at the Bank in
bringing institutions towards that 7% threshold.

Stephanie Flanders, BBC:

Governor, people in the financial markets seem to expect the
Bank of England to raise interest rates now rather sooner than

Page 3
Press Conference

they did before you offered your forward guidance on that subject.
Have they failed to understand forward guidance, or do they just
not believe it, do you think?

Mark Carney:

No, well look Stephanie, I don’t want to over-interpret relatively
recent moves in financial markets, but the guidance is not around
a date, the guidance as you know is around an economic
outcome - specifically unemployment. And different institutions,
different individuals, can have different views about when that
economic outcome is going to be achieved.

I think that the thing that has to be stressed is that just the
achievement of that economic outcome - it does not then follow
that interest rates move. And that's something I tried to make
clear in the speech today.

There's a variety of reasons to expect that it could take some time
longer than the middle of – well, than current market expectations
- for adjustment in Bank Rate, because the underlying
performance of the labour market could be different, for good
reasons as well, because we’re recovering productivity. But I’d
stress that the assessment that the MPC will take, when the
threshold is reached, will be what’s right for the economy at the
time. This is not a pre-commitment on action at that point.

Ed Conway, Sky News:

It’s really following on from that point really; each time that you've
stood up recently you've announced these policies. You
announced forward guidance; the market has reacted in a
different way to how I think a lot of people might have anticipated
that they would have reacted. Were you disappointed by the
market reaction after the Inflation Report? And could you give a
yardstick as to what would constitute success in terms of the kind
of message, and the kind of reaction, that you’re seeking to get
from markets with, for instance, today’s speech?

Page 4
Press Conference

Mark Carney:

Well, look, let me say something about markets. And I think you
know this but maybe it bears repeating. Markets react – I mean a
market reaction is relative to what they expected that they were
going to hear. And in trailing into an announcement, the original
announcement on forward guidance, I mean it was - the remit
question had been set out by the Chancellor. I had given a
speech in December; the remit question had been set out by the
Chancellor in February. We’d been working on a number of
comments from MPC, a number of analyses had been done, and
an assessment. So it’s relative to expectations, that's first and
foremost.
What are we looking for? What we’re looking for is - in where the
message of the policy is directly to the people who put capital to
work, directly to the people in that room and by extension across
the country, to businesses and to households - to provide a
degree of certainty about the likely path of policy.
We’re in a recovery that's just beginning. There are signs of
some broadening of that, but it’s just beginning. It is a long way
back, a very long way back - we’re lagging virtually everyone else
in the advanced world. There's a lot of spare capacity. The
question is how much. But until we reach that 7% threshold we’re
in a position where we don’t have to make that assessment about
whether to adjust Bank Rate up. And that's core.
So I wouldn’t - I think hanging this on markets is to miss the point.
What my colleagues, and what I'm hearing, are hearing across
the country, is that there is appreciation for that greater degree of
certainty that's been provided by the Bank. And remember, as I
said in the room, the rate that matters for three quarters of the
households, almost three quarters of households, and more than
three quarters of businesses, are rates less than one year, most

Page 5
Press Conference

cases the floating rate. And those rates are linked directly to
Bank Rate. And Bank Rate is decided by the MPC.

Mark Gough, ITV News:

Virtually every small and medium business I talk to here in the
Midlands say the biggest problem is getting lending from banks.
Do you think that banks are doing enough? And do you think
banks actually understand the importance of small, medium
businesses to triggering growth in the economy?

Mark Carney:

I think that the banking system here has improved but it is not fully
healthy. And one of the consequences of that, and one of the
consequences about the uncertainty on the economic outlook,
has been restriction to lending to small, medium sized enterprises,
without question. So part of it is about capacity, but also part of it
is about risk appetite. And as the recovery progresses, and as a
degree of certainty is provided alongside that, those are linked
obviously reinforcing, that helps address the risk appetite
question. And we’ve been, the Bank, the FPC, the PRA, have
been addressing the capacity issue by ensuring that banks have
appropriate capitalisation now.

Claire Jones, Financial Times:

You know it seems clear that you’re using the unemployment rate
as a proxy for spare capacity, but as I'm sure you’d acknowledge
yourself it’s not perfect in that respect, you know, because of
things like the increasing part time jobs and so on and so forth.
Would it be possible for you to be a little bit clearer about what
else you’re looking at in terms of trying to measure how much
spare capacity there is?

Mark Carney:

Well it’s the right question. When we look at the unemployment when we look at the labour market - obviously we look at hours
worked, average hours worked, we look at the participation rate
both relative to history but also adjusted for, as demographics
have moved on since, you know, pre-crisis history. We look at

Page 6
Press Conference

measures of involuntary part time, as I mentioned in the speech.
We look at total hours worked as well. I mean we look at a variety
of factors of underlying strength in the labour market.

What will be interesting as the recovery progresses, and we talk
about guidance and using the unemployment rate, use this
terminology of a robust framework, a framework to test the
degree of spare capacity. So what is also of tremendous interest
is the extent to which investment and productivity pick up as the
recovery progresses. And all of those factors, and more, will be
relevant in terms of an assessment of the degree of spare
capacity both in the labour market in firms, in the broader
economy, and therefore, combined with the prospects for
demand, all of those are relevant for the outlook for inflation at the
point at which we reach the 7% threshold.
Now obviously we’re not waiting until that point to do all this
analysis, but those are some examples of some of the issues that
we are quite appropriately looking at in order to determine the
sum of the spare capacity. And of course within the context of all
that what’s measured extremely well, as you know, are the labour
market indicators, by and large. What’s more difficult to measure
are the degree of spare capacity within firms broadly speaking,
more specifically the rate of growth of productivity.

Ben Chu, The Independent:

Governor you spoke in your speech about some of the
circumstances in which you and the MPC might consider more
stimulus. And you said that this could happen if short term rates
tighten and the recovery seems to be falling short. Is it
reasonable to assume from that that if the short term rates do rise
and the incoming flow of data is as solid as it has been recently,
that more stimulus is off the table?

Page 7
Press Conference

Mark Carney:

I think what I said in my speech was if effective financial
conditions tighten, which is broader than short term rates and
financial conditions - you look more broadly in terms of short,
longer term rates, effective spreads to corporates, equity market
indicators, exchange rate - broader financial conditions. But
obviously we need to look at the sum, you don’t hone in on just
one, so we’d look at that.

But part of the advantage of the guidance framework, and the
work we did, is to provide as much clarity I think as, and certainly
in the collective view of the MPC, we feel as much clarity as we
can on what we see as the optimal path, the best path to get from
where we are today, where inflation is above target and output is
far below potential, to bring those back to their - inflation back to
target over the right time horizon, while supporting growth. And
so we will set - we’ve given you the minimum amount of stimulus,
the minimum amount of stimulus that's necessary in order to
achieve that. If we need to do more we’ll do more.

David Thomas, Market News:

The Bank hasn’t published its unemployment forecast in the past.
I was wondering if you might consider doing that so we can
maybe have a better - better assess the Bank’s track record at
forecasting unemployment and compare it with those issued by
the private sector.

Mark Carney:

The forecast that was provided three weeks ago with the inflation
report is the first MPC forecast of unemployment, so …

David Thomas, Market News:

The first one published.

Mark Carney:

It’s the first one we’ve done. I mean staff do things and stuff, but I
don’t have something - we have published every MPC forecast of
unemployment already, how is that? There’s only one data point

Page 8
Press Conference

unfortunately so the analysis of its accuracy, at least in the short
term, is going to be difficult to perform.

Simon Kennedy,
Bloomberg Markets:

In the August meeting some members of the MPC saw a
compelling case for more quantitative easing. Were you one of
them?

Mark Carney:

I just gave you my views on - this is my speech today, and I think
you can infer from what I said whether I think that's currently
necessary. In fact you’re going to have to infer because I'm not
going to draw it out any more specifically.

Faisal Islam, Channel 4 News:

So right now the Bank of England is subsidising funding for
commercial banks through the Funding for Lending Scheme. The
government is subsidising mortgages through Help to Buy.
You're promising lower interest rates for longer, and now bank
liquidity rules have been weakened. If this does end up getting
slightly out of control in terms of credit, and the credit goes
disproportionately into mortgages rather than business, do you
have the tools to rein that back in?

Mark Carney:

Well it’s the right question, and the third part of the speech today
was to talk about the other tools that the Bank has that potentially
could be used, if appropriate, if necessary, to address specific
vulnerability, whether it’s in the housing market, or a certain
sector of the financial market. It starts with more intensive
supervision of activity in that area. That's something we’ve used,
certainly used to effect in Canada. It can include adjustments to
capital requirements for specific sectors, adjustments to terms to
lending or mortgages in those sectors. So we have those tools.
But first and foremost it’s the responsibility of the Financial Policy
Committee at the Bank to make an assessment of those

Page 9
Press Conference

vulnerabilities. And the point is that, you know, interest rate policy
is focused on delivering the core monetary policy mandate,
achieving the inflation target in the way that we have described.
And it’s the last line of defence to address those types of issues.

So we have a committee who is charged with the responsibility of
assessing those vulnerabilities - it will do that. We have a
committee that has the ability to make recommendations and in
some cases - to make recommendations, and we also have a
committee which has an ability, the PRA, which has an ability to
take steps that it could take, if necessary, in order to address
emerging vulnerabilities to institutions and to the broader
economy.

So there's a lot we can do in that area. I'm not saying we can do
absolutely everything, but there's a lot we can do in that area. It’s
our responsibility to use those tools if we think it’s necessary, yes.

David Milliken, Reuters:

A few weeks ago sort of at the Inflation Report news conference
you said that you thought that sort of market interest rates were
sort of clearly out of line with fundamentals. And I was just really
wondering given developments since then, whether that's sort of
something that you would sort of reiterate now?

Mark Carney:

Is that a quote?

David Milliken, Reuters:

Something that I was …

Mark Carney:

We will take an assessment at our next policy meeting of the sum
of financial conditions, the sum of data, the momentum, that's
there. And in the context of forward guidance, assess the stance
of monetary policy. Although I would remind that we have said
that interest rates will remain at the current levels until that
threshold is achieved, and we’ll reinvest all the proceeds from the

Page 10
Press Conference

asset purchase facility, any maturing elements of the asset
purchase facility, until that threshold is achieved. So there's only
one direction possible on the adjustment of policy.

But, you know, the adoption of guidance is, in my view, an
important change in policy. It’s something that reaches directly to
those who put capital to work, households and businesses. And
one evaluates, over time, the effectiveness of that as part of a
mixed strategy which includes the level of base rate and the size
of the balance sheet of the Bank of England that currently exists.
As well as Funding for Lending and other aspects I should say.

Larry Elliott, The Guardian:

I just wondered whether you’re surprised at all by the market
reaction, given that the one policy announcement in the speech
was an easing of liquidity requirements for the banks. The
markets clearly are hearing what you’re saying but are not
especially convinced by it, they don’t think that the unemployment
rate is going to take three years to get down to 7%. And given the
Bank’s recent forecasting record, that's hardly surprising.

So I just wondered whether you think that given that, given the
market response and clearly the sort of lack of belief in the Bank’s
forecasting, that you are going to need to back up forward
guidance with some policy action, whether forward guidance on
its own as a verbal signal to the market is going to be sufficient
here?

Mark Carney:

A couple of things. One is what’s important is the effective
stimulus that's being provided to the economy in order to achieve
real and nominal economic outcomes. The core outcome that
we’re responsible for is achieving the 2% inflation target, and
we’ve been absolutely clear, as clear as we possibly can be, over
what horizon we think we should achieve that 2% in the current

Page 11
Press Conference

extraordinary environment. And we are in extraordinary times, I
think you know that.
So we’re providing stimulus to the economy in a variety of ways the level of Bank Rate, the guidance we’ve given around that.
The size of the balance sheet, the guidance we’ve given around
that. We’re not going to reduce the size of the balance sheet. We
might increase it but we’re not going to reduce it. Funding for
Lending, providing additional liquidity flexibility to the major banks
and building societies in the country so that they, in this period of
transition, can put additional resources out to lend. They won’t
necessarily use all those additional resources but they can put
additional resources out to lend in the economy.
The sum of that is the sum of the stimulus. We’re very
consciously pursuing a mixed strategy, and we’re very
consciously as well, because of the enormous uncertainty that
has buffeted this economy and buffeted individuals in this country
over the course of the last five years, trying to provide as much
certainty as possible.
And our certainty is about two things. One, we’re going to
achieve our inflation target. Secondly, we’re going to support that
recovery and we’re providing certainty about the level of that
support, the minimum level of that support, until an economic
outcome is achieved, which is unemployment going to 7%. Not a
date on a calendar, until an economic outcome is achieved. And
it’s the sum of that stimulus, all those aspects, which will
determine the path of this economy, will be the Bank’s
contribution to the termination of that path.

Facilitator:

We’re basically out of time but maybe just a couple more.

Page 12
Press Conference

Helia Ebrahimi, CNBC:

Excluding RBS and given the relaxation of the liquidity buffers, if
the PRA’s capital requirements are met does that mean UK
banks have been fixed?

Mark Carney:

Not totally. There are a range, and I detailed them in - I didn’t go
through the gory details in the room but some of them are
covered in the speech, in the written speech, there are a variety of
other issues on the table. Not just issues but requirements that
are going to be on the table. The question is the transition to
implementing the recommendations of the Vickers Commission,
the independent commission on banking.
I’ll speak with my role as Chairman of the Financial Stability
Board; there are additional surcharges for global systemically
important banks. There will be issues around aggregate loss
absorbing capacity for those institutions. There's issues around
how they organise themselves for derivatives activities, trading
activities. There are issues around solo capital; I can go on and
on and on. There are a series of issues that, particularly for the
most major and complex banks, will pertain.

That said - and those will all be followed through and they will all
be implemented - but getting to that initial threshold of 7% and the
associated threshold of the 3% leverage ratio, that allows us to
get to a position where we can then have a sensible transition
path for implementing those other elements, other absolutely
necessary elements, of reform. And so it’s incredibly important
work that, in effect, my predecessors and in a number of cases
still colleagues at the Bank, have put in place in order to get us to
that point.

Facilitator:

I think we’d better make this the last one.

Page 13
Press Conference

Kathryn Hopkins, The Times:

The figures show that banks still aren’t lending near enough to
SMEs as is needed. A lot of people, including cabinet ministers,
are urging small businesses to look to alternative sources of
finance. How safe do you think these are? I heard over the
weekend that the FCA is considering looking into crowd funding,
and I just wanted to see if you think all of these options are safe.

And really quickly, is Jake Bugg the type of music you listen to at
home?

Laughter

Mark Carney:

In terms of alternative - I mean the SME question is - there are
two elements to the SME question, I think. And one thing I would
stress is that we’re still in a position - one of the things we
shouldn’t try to judge the success of the banking system by is our
aggregate credit figures, because the aggregate level of credit there's still a healthy aggregate level of credit out to the private
sector in this economy.

The bigger issue is the reallocation of that credit over time. So,
you know, and it’s the new SME or the SME which has new ideas
that needs that access to credit, whereas in some cases one
might have concern about forbearance or other aspects with
SMEs who continue to be rolled at very low interest rates, and
large institutions as well.
I won’t make a specific comment on the crowd funding, you know
the equity aspect. I think that the core of - SME funding, one of
the realities of SME funding is that it’s very often related, in fact
almost always secured against some sort of property asset or
physical asset. And the recovery in those values, or at least the
floor under those values, and the recovery again in prospect for

Page 14
Press Conference

demand, does make a difference to the risk appetite of banks and
therefore the ability to fund.

Look, there is no mission accomplished banner up behind us here
saying that the banking system is fixed. But what’s happened is
that we pushed appropriately the system to be adequately
capitalised. It can be better capitalised, but to be adequately
capitalised, and that’s important. That is really important and that
will start to filter through.
And as for Mr Bugg, I hope I haven’t jinxed him now by admitting
that I saw him. I saw him play in Hyde Park and he was
outstanding - and he is from Nottingham and he is very good. So
that's it, that's all I got.

Facilitator:

On that musical note thank you all very much indeed for coming.
See you again.

Mark Carney:

END

Thank you.

