Mark Carney, Governor - Speech
28th August 2013

Page 2
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech

Alastair Cunningham:

Ladies and gentlemen, could I have your attention please. My
name is Alastair Cunningham and I am the Bank of England's
agent here in the East Midlands. Now my day job is to act as the
monetary policymaker's eyes and ears in my region, the East
Midlands, travelling the length and the breadth of the patch
talking to firms of all shapes and sizes about trading conditions
and critically the way you're all responding to them.

But today it is my great pleasure to welcome my new boss,
Governor Carney, to Nottingham, to hear at first-hand from some
of the agency’s contacts and to share some of his thinking with
you. And without more ado let me hand over to Governor Carney,
welcome to Nottingham Mr Governor.

Applause

Mark Carney:

Thank you very much Alastair and I'd like to thank all of you for
taking the time to join Alastair, myself, my colleague Tim Taylor,
Nils Blythe from the Bank, spending a good part of your afternoon,
you're only about halfway through the afternoon now that you're
through lunch and listening to my speech.

But it is a great pleasure for me to be in the East Midlands to
deliver my first speech as Governor of the Bank of England. And
I have to say it's not by accident. We're here because of the
diversity of this economy, with leaders in logistics, in precision
engineering, in retail, information services, biosciences,
education, the list goes on, manufacturing. This is a real
bellwether for the UK economy. And it's in regions such as this
and industries such as those that will determine the course of this
recovery.

And so we're here - I'm here now to speak, but really we're here to
listen. I very much appreciate those of you who spent some time

Page 3
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech

earlier this morning talking about trading conditions both here,
across the country - financial conditions, challenges that
businesses are facing, reactions to what the Bank of England is
trying to do and providing important advice.

In my years of central banking, I have found that there is no
substitute for those types of discussions, for hearing directly from
those who deliver economic growth. And what I heard this
morning and at lunch and what I've heard elsewhere thus far in
the UK, and what my colleagues are hearing elsewhere, is that a
renewed recovery is taking hold amidst a rising tide of optimism.
There are signs that that recovery is broad based and set to
continue and this is obviously welcome and it should be
encouraged.

Over the past five years, a pervasive sense of uncertainty has
held this economy back. The British people have been through
the virtual collapse of the financial system, the worst recession in
living memory, large job losses, falls in real wages and an at
times harrowing crisis in the euro area, our largest trading
partner.

As a consequence households have been worried about their
savings, their jobs, their earning power and their homes; and
companies have been rightly concerned about the availability of
credit, the health of their suppliers, the viability of their markets
and the prospects for their investments. That uncertainty has
reduced confidence, dampened spending, and slowed growth.
And that's something that Peter touched on in his kind opening
remarks.

The real cost has been that about a million more people are
unemployed today than before the recession. And also at the
same time capacity has lain idle in firms and opportunities have
gone wanting for lack of finance and confidence. It will take a

Page 4
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech

period of robust growth to begin to reduce meaningfully this spare
capacity in the labour market and in companies.

The Bank of England’s task now is to secure this fledgling
recovery, to allow it to develop into a period of sustained and
robust growth. We aim to get there in part by reducing the
uncertainty that has held back growth. And we are using our full
suite of policy tools to help rebuild confidence so that we all can
move forward in a sustainable manner.

First, we are giving confidence that interest rates won’t go up until
jobs, incomes and spending are recovering at a sustainable pace.
In particular, we will have to see the rate of unemployment,
currently 7.8%, fall to at least a threshold of 7% before even
beginning to consider raising Bank Rate.

Second, we are building confidence in banks so that they can
serve the needs of the real economy by providing credit to those
who can put it to work. In particular, we have required banks to
repair their balance sheets so that their capital ratios at least
reach a threshold of 7% by the turn of the year.

Crossing these two 7% thresholds is necessary to ensure that our
economy can withstand the inevitable bumps along the road to
recovery. Now we must meet these thresholds in a disciplined
way. We will ensure that we bring inflation down as the recovery
progresses. And we will use our considerable policy tools to
prevent new vulnerabilities, whether in the housing sector or the
financial sector, from arising during this critical transition phase.

So today I want to say more about how the Bank will work to help
bring the British economy over the threshold into a sustainable
recovery and what that means for all of you.

Page 5
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech

Three weeks ago the Bank's Monetary Policy Committee did
something that it has never done before. We gave clear,
quantitative guidance about the future path of monetary policy.
Specifically, we announced that we do not intend to raise Bank
Rate at least until the unemployment rate falls to 7%, provided
there are no material threats to either price or financial stability.
All nine members of the MPC agreed to set monetary policy in
future according to this framework of forward guidance.

Now that does not mean that Bank Rate will automatically rise
when unemployment falls to 7%, instead the 7% threshold is a
staging post along the road to recovery. When unemployment
reaches 7% the MPC will reassess the state of the economy and
the appropriate stance of monetary policy.

Our forward guidance provides you with the certainty that interest
rates will not rise too soon. Exactly how long they stay low will
depend on the progress of the recovery and in particular how
quickly unemployment comes down. What matters is that rates
won’t go up until jobs and incomes are really growing. The
knowledge that interest rates will stay low until the recovery is
well established should give greater confidence to households to
spend responsibly and businesses to invest wisely.

Now it may seem that unemployment doesn’t have far to fall, from
its current level to 7%. The MPC’s central view, though, is that
this could take some time for three reasons. First, while the
outlook for growth has improved considerably in recent months,
growth prospects over the next three years are solid, not stellar.
And that suggests that spare capacity will be only used up
gradually.

Secondly, a great many jobs need to be created to bring
unemployment down. A fall in unemployment from its current
level to 7% over three years would mean well over three quarters

Page 6
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech

of a million new jobs created and, given the shrinkage expected in
the public sector, over a million new jobs in the private sector.

Third, a recovery in growth does not necessarily mean faster job
creation and lower unemployment. More than half of the increase
in employment since the recession has been in part-time jobs.
Many part-timers would prefer to work full time. If the recovery
were fuelled by involuntary part-timers becoming full time workers,
nearly half a million fewer jobs would be created.

In addition, there is certainly scope for the economy to grow
through an increase in output per hour worked, rather than
through new job creation. Productivity growth has been anaemic
and, remarkably, the UK is no more productive than it was back in
2005. And to put it in context, that was before Nottingham's own
Jake Bugg got his first guitar. Since then, as you know, I know,
he's had a number one record and a string of very successful gigs;
he's become a lot more productive. And the critical question is
how much more and how quickly can productivity improve across
the broader economy.

The MPC’s central view is that productivity growth is likely to pick
up, only slowly in the early phases of the recovery, but there is
potential for growth to accelerate, for that productivity growth to
accelerate, as the recovery takes hold. The slow pickup initially
could mean that unemployment could fall quite rapidly, but fall
short of that 7% threshold.

Over the next three years, productivity is expected by the MPC to
grow more slowly than its pre-crisis trend. And even that modest
level of growth is not assured; it is hardly an aggressive forecast.
The MPC's forecast implies that productivity reaches its 2008
level only in 2015. And it means that productivity doesn’t catch up
any of its 15% shortfall relative to its pre-crisis trend. Were any of

Page 7
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech

that productivity catch-up to happen, unemployment could take
even longer than three years to reach that 7% threshold.

But the point is - the point of all this is that in such a scenario, you
would know to expect interest rates to stay lower for longer,
encouraging household spending and business investment.

Our forward guidance acts as a stabiliser, securing the scale and
duration of the recovery that's needed to bring unemployment
down.

Now the prospect that interest rates might stay at their low levels
for longer will not be welcome for savers. We have tremendous
sympathy for them, after all they have done the right thing, they've
set money aside, and now they are earning returns that are
substantially below what they would have expected. But raising
interest rates now is not the answer; instead what savers need is
what we all need: a stronger economy. A stronger economy will
mean higher asset prices, and will allow interest rates to return to
normal levels in a sustainable way. A strong economy is in all of
our interests, as it will deliver better growth prospects and better
job prospects for our friends, neighbours, children and
grandchildren.

Now let me reassure you that our mandate to deliver price
stability has not changed. The MPC’s forward guidance is fully
consistent with price stability. I can also assure you of my
personal commitment to price stability. I certainly have no
hesitation raising interest rates when it's necessary and I did that
when I was Governor of the Bank of Canada, we raised interest
rates several times as the recovery there gathered pace.

But that was the appropriate policy for Canada at that time. The
challenges in the UK today are different, and policy must be
tailored accordingly.

Page 8
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech

The Bank of England’s remit, confirmed by the Chancellor in the
last budget, our remit recognises that, at times, it is appropriate to
bring inflation back to target more slowly in order to avoid
unnecessary volatility in output. With a depressed level of output
and inflation above target due to temporary factors, rather than
demand pressures, this is such a time. And the MPC is charting
the right path back to its 2% inflation target.

Now, much has been made of the upwards movements in market
interest rates since our announcement of forward guidance and I
would like to give you my perspective. There's been a
generalised upward movement in long term bond yields, across
the advanced economies, including the United Kingdom, over the
course of the past month. The main common driver is
speculation that the US Federal Reserve will soon reduce the
pace of its asset purchases. That has, not surprisingly - that
speculation, that possibility, has not surprisingly affected yields in
other countries because safe, liquid sovereign bonds of the
world’s largest economies are close substitutes for each other.

In the UK, these movements have been reinforced by growing
expectations of recovery. As we explained at the time of our
forward guidance announcement, a rise in the yields on long term
bonds is consistent both with our commitment to price stability
and supporting the recovery.

Now market interest rates at medium terms, at terms of two to five
years, have also risen recently. The date at which markets
expect the first increase in Bank Rate has moved from the end of
2015 to around the middle. And one possible explanation is that
markets think that unemployment will come down to 7% more
quickly than the Bank thinks. And since the aim of our policy is to
secure recovery as quickly as possible, that would of course be
welcome.

Page 9
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech

But policy is built not on hope, but on expectation. And we
estimate there is only a one in three chance of unemployment
coming down that quickly.

Furthermore, thinking unemployment will come down faster than
the Bank expects isn’t enough to believe that interest rates will
rise soon. As I said earlier, the 7% threshold is a staging post to
assess the economy. Nobody should assume that it is a trigger
for raising interest rates.

Now another possible explanation for those movements in
medium term bond yields is, like the moves in longer term yields,
they reflect changes in expectations of US monetary policy. But
we should remember that the US recovery is much further
advanced than that in the UK.

And while, rightly so, much has been made of the special
relationship between the United States and the United Kingdom,
that relationship is not so special that the possibility of a reduction
in the pace of additional monetary stimulus in the United States
warrants a current reduction in the degree of monetary stimulus in
the United Kingdom.

Movements in long-term market interest rates are certainly
relevant, but what matters most to you is what actually happens
to Bank Rate, now and in the future. That is because interest
rates on 70% of loans to households and more than 50% of loans
to businesses are linked directly to Bank Rate, and a further 30%
of loans to businesses re-price within a year.

And it is the Bank of England that controls Bank Rate. We do not
intend even to consider raising it before unemployment falls to
7%. And again, when unemployment does reach that point, we

Page 10
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech

will control whether a rise is warranted, taking into account the
strength of the recovery and the outlook for inflation.

We're also aware that the upward move in market expectations of
where Bank Rate will lead could, at the margin, feed into effective
financial conditions facing the real economy. And the MPC will be
watching those conditions closely. If they tighten, and the
recovery seems to be falling short of the strong growth we need,
we will consider carefully whether, and how best, to stimulate the
recovery further. Our forward guidance was clear that, although
we would not reduce stimulus until the recovery is secure, we
would if necessary provide more stimulus.

Now confidence that interest rates will stay low is a necessary
step to securing the recovery, but it is not sufficient. The UK also
needs a fit and healthy financial sector. To serve the needs of the
wider economy by extending credit to where it is needed, banks
must command the confidence of their customers and their
investors. And that's why a second element of the Bank of
England’s strategy is to ensure that banks reach a clear threshold
of good health.

Now some argue that repair of banks’ balance sheets holds back
the economic recovery because it causes banks to hold back
their lending. The reality is the opposite; where capital has been
rebuilt across the world and balance sheets have been repaired,
banking systems and economies have prospered. Without an
adequate capital base banks are wary of lending and if they do,
they'll find themselves needing to turn off the lending taps when
the unexpected happens, as it inevitably does. Investors will lack
the confidence to fund banks cheaply, raising the costs of credit
to the real economy and, most importantly, you'll lack the
confidence that credit will be available when you need it.

Page 11
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech

And for all those reasons the Bank of England has established a
threshold for the capital base of the major banks and building
societies, after taking into account likely future losses, fines for
past misconduct and prudent calculations of risk. That threshold,
a capital base of 7% of their risk weighted assets and at least 3%
of their total assets, must be crossed if the system is to be able to
support and sustain the recovery.

Some of the UK's major banks have already crossed it, and over
the summer we made sure that the others have put in place plans
to reach it shortly, and none of those plans involve cutting back
lending to the real economy.

As a result of the Bank's actions we can relax other requirements
to help with the flow of credit. Balance sheet repair will give
confidence to depositors and investors who provide funding to
banks. And with market funding assured, banks can safely hold
fewer liquid assets, such as government bonds, that act - and
these are liquid assets that act as a cushion to be sold in the
event that investors involved withdraw their funding.

Accordingly, I can confirm today that, for major banks and
building societies meeting the 7% capital threshold, the Bank of
England will reduce the level of required liquid asset holdings.
The effect will be to lower total required holdings by £90 billion,
once all eight of the major institutions have met their threshold.
That will help underpin the supply of credit, since every pound
currently held in liquid assets is a pound that could be lent to the
real economy.

Taken together, our actions create not just a more resilient
system, but also one more able to support and sustain recovery
by serving that real economy.

Page 12
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech

Now a recovering banking sector, coupled with persistently low
interest rates and new government programmes, may lead to
concerns that the seeds are being sown for a new cycle in the
housing market. The number of mortgage approvals for house
purchase is up by 20% on a year ago, while house prices have
risen by 5% over the same period, and by more in some parts of
the country.

Now those moves need to be kept in some perspective, however.
Mortgage approvals themselves are currently running at a little
more than half, and transactions a little more than two-thirds, of
their pre-crisis levels. Households’ debt servicing costs relative
to income are below their 20-year average, and houses cost the
same - this is across the country - houses cost the same relative
to earnings as they did in 2003. Nevertheless, the Bank of
England is acutely aware of the risk of unsustainable credit and
house price growth and we’re monitoring it closely.

The important thing to recognise is that the Bank now has other
tools, tools other than interest rates, that can be used to contain
risks in the property and financial sectors. These so-called
macroprudential tools were not available to us before the crisis
but we're now fully prepared to deploy them if they're needed.

The Bank of England is now in a position, for example, to
supervise lending to specific sectors more intensively; to make
recommendations to banks and building societies to restrict terms
on which new credit is provided, or even to raise capital
requirements on mortgages or other types of lending. Having
these in our toolkit, and if necessary using them, will help us to
keep interest rates low to secure recovery without creating risks
that make that recovery ultimately unsustainable.

And if that is not enough, a final safeguard is built into our new
forward guidance framework. The Bank’s independent Financial

Page 13
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech

Policy Committee has the task of warning publicly if persistently
low interest rates are leading to vulnerabilities that can't be
contained by other means, and other means that are influenced
by that same independent Financial Policy Committee. In short,
we are providing stimulus that the economy needs, but we’re
doing so in a disciplined way to secure price and financial
stability.

So let me conclude by drawing together the pieces of this jigsaw.
Developments at home and abroad suggest that conditions are in
place for growth to be sustained into the medium-term, though at
a pace that is likely to be more measured rather than rapid.

Households in the UK have reduced their debt levels and they're
now spending out of income. The outlook for the world economy
and our major export markets is a bit better. The extreme risks in
the euro area have been substantially reduced and the global
financial system is being repaired.

Now all that said there will still be bumps in the road ahead. A few
of those bumps can be foreseen; others will come as a surprise.
Emerging market economies, the engine of global growth in
recent years, are now under strain as capital flows back to
recovering advanced economies.

A few less well-managed financial institutions still have a long
journey ahead to rebuild their balance sheets and are still
vulnerable to shocks until they do so.

Progress in the euro area will remain uneven.

Now we can't control all these events. Instead we are focused on
doing what we can to reduce uncertainty and build resilience so
that the recovery can be sustained despite those inevitable
shocks ahead.

Page 14
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech

We're removing uncertainty with our guidance that interest rates
will stay low at least until unemployment has fallen. That will
boost demand.

By repairing the balance sheets of banks we are putting them in a
position to support the real economy, and that will promote
investment. And by standing ready to use the range of other
tools at our disposal, we can help avoid sowing the seeds of the
next crisis.

In these ways, the Bank of England is helping the British
economy over the threshold and into strong, sustainable and
balanced growth. Thank you very much for your attention, I'd be
happy to take a few questions.

Applause

Alastair Cunningham:

So as Governor Carney said we've got time for a little bit of a
question and answer session, and just in terms of the logistics
about how we'd like this to work, if you can raise your hand and
attract the attention of one of the members of the team with a little
paddle like that. And then once they arrive at your table I'll call out
the number and if you could just stand up, take the roving mic and
then everyone will be able to hear the question that you're going
to be asking.

Mark Carney:

And if you could - name and home address, if you can give that …

Laughter

Alastair Cunningham:

Oh name and home address as well apparently.

Mark Carney:

We've a few of our security people here today.

Page 15
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech

Stephen Martin, Clugston Group:

Hello Governor Carney, you were talking about forward guidance
and I'd just like to have some clarity on your view on when
unemployment will fall to 7%? And secondly, what's your view on
when inflation will hit the 2% target that's been much talked about
but not achieved?

Mark Carney:

Yeah, well let me say one word of context and I'll answer the
questions. I mean the core responsibility of the Bank is to
achieve the 2% inflation target, and obviously we're starting from
a position where output is very weak and inflation is above target.
And the task for the Monetary Policy Committee is to chart the
right path to get inflation down while we're supporting output.

And we're using forward guidance as a tool, with other things that
the Bank's doing in order to achieve those goals. But we're also
using it as a tool to provide as much clarity to citizens and
business people about the expected path of policy.

So the answer on inflation is a little more than two years, so the
third quarter of 2015, inflation - bringing it down to that 2% target.

In terms of the question of when exactly does unemployment
reach 7%, we can't give a precise answer. I mean I can give you
a variety of answers, I can give you a precise answer that a core
view in terms of relative probabilities: if interest rates stay at the
current level, half a percent for the next three years, it's as likely
as not that unemployment will still be a bit above 7% after three
years.

I mentioned in the speech that the probability, on that same
forecast, that unemployment could come down to 7% in two
years' time is about a third, one in three. So it depends on how
the economy actually functions.

Page 16
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech

The core is though that the guidance we're giving to you, as
citizens and as business people, is that we're not going to begin
to think about adjusting that Bank Rate until we see real growth in
jobs and incomes, and you can measure it on one statistic which
is the unemployment rate. And it's at that point we begin to
consider an adjustment in monetary policy.

And the advantage of that is that an economy where
unemployment has come down to that 7% level, is an economy
that's created significant additional jobs, where there's real
demand, where there starts to be some support for income
growth, real income growth, for workers, and it's an economy that
has a great ability to support and to function under - under higher
interest rates if they're warranted at that point. So you have a
sense of what the trading conditions would be like at the point
where the MPC begins to reassess the appropriate stance of
policy.

Frank Simms,
FA Simms & Partners, Lutterworth: Good afternoon Governor Carney. I'd like your opinion really on
the creation of a national bank. We've now got European
approval for this, because one of the things that really bothers me
is the flow of finance to fledgling and small companies. You can't
expect the private sector in banking to lend to these very small
companies because they have no security. I mean this works - a
friend of mine in Germany, I mean the system works in Germany
very well and also in certain of the states in the USA. So what are
your views, do you think we - we've got to find a way somehow of
putting money into peoples' hands to create businesses and
create jobs?

Mark Carney:

Frank thanks for the question, leading me dangerously into the
turf of others. But let me make a few comments on that. I mean
certainly, yeah we've got to create the conditions to create jobs
and growth. And what the Bank of England can do is - I've tried to

Page 17
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech

outline as clearly as I can in terms of the appropriate stance of
monetary policy and getting the banks fixed. And getting the
banks - the private banks - to thresholds of capitalisation where
they have to go out and work for business, where they have the
confidence of deposit investors.

There are different models for small and medium sized finance
around the world, the core of a model that can work is that it's
largely bank-based, but those banks have to be well capitalised
which is what we're trying to focus on. And I know that the model
in my home country, Canada, it's largely a bank - SMEs are
basically bank-based financed, there's a bit of a national bank but
it's not a big, big player in the scheme of things. So that's the core
that can work.

It's the judgement of others, who tend to get - you know those
who go out and search for votes - or who've already received
votes and are in power - to make decisions about whether or not
that could be supplemented. But we'll focus on making sure the
core of it is there.

And we'll also focus on something I didn't talk about today, but
through a broader set of reforms to make sure that the capital
market side of the system is working well so that there is
appropriate support through markets to broader finance, because
that can free up balance sheet from core banks in order to provide
lending.

Frank Simms,
FA Simms & Partners, Lutterworth: Thank you.

Mark Carney:

Thank you very much Frank.

John Collins, Steetley Dolomite:

Governor Carney, as an exporter I'm very keen to hear your views
on exchange rates. And if I heard you correctly you talk about a

Page 18
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech

stronger Eurozone. Now with interest rates being benign for the
next few years how do you see respective exchange rates
moving?

Mark Carney:

John, some are going to up and others are going to do down.

Laughter and applause

Mark Carney:

That's a core element of it. I think, you know, it's a territory we
don't tread on too often and it's important for you, it's important for
a variety of people in the room and across the country. I think the
core to recognise is that you know sustainable rebalancing of this
economy externally and internally is ultimately going to come
through productivity growth, and that's going to come from
investment. And investment is going to be - the core of
investment - the ideas are going to come from people like
yourselves in this room, but you need the conditions in order to
make those decisions.

A lot of those decisions which have been held back quite naturally
given the uncertainty, and in some cases the availability of
finance. And so we'll work on that component, unlocks the
investment, supports the productivity and that supports the
rebalancing and so hence - and I've just used up my time too. I
was going to say something about the currency but now I've run
out of time.

Steve Goodman,
Business Breakthrough:

You've mentioned productivity a number of times: not a terribly
good track record for the UK from 2005, and you put some fairly
modest and cautious ideas forward as to what it can be in the
future. Have you formed a view yet as to whether the UK
economy really has the innate capability to grow productivity at a
reasonable rate in today's competitive world, is it there in the tank
to be un-let, or have we got to do better?

Page 19
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech

Mark Carney:

Well there's two questions in there, or elements in there - several
elements in there. One is do we need to be better and the answer
- obviously yes, we need to do better. We clearly need to do
better, no progress since 2005 - you know that's not very
ambitious and it's not very realistic.

But I think the question, you know, from our - and to some extent
in my core responsibility as a member of the Monetary Policy
Committee we're at the easy stage of this discussion because
there hasn't been that growth, number one.

Number two, if you looked at UK productivity was growing in the
run up to the crisis; you'd know this I'm sure - 2.4 or 2.5%,
averaged about 2.4%. Now some of that was in the energy sector,
North Sea, and so you adjust for that. The trend was really 2.2%
let’s say.

Some of that might have been a little spurious because it was in
the financial sector, it was a lot less productive than it thought it
was, and so you can adjust off of that. But in our forecast, in the
MPC’s forecast, productivity growth, even though the level of
productivity is a full 15% down from where it would have been on
an old trend, productivity growth is only running at 1.8%. That’s
not very aggressive. And I don’t see - I didn’t see from afar and I
haven’t seen anything from up close, which suggests to me that
there's been a sort of Soviet style collapse in productivity in the
United Kingdom.

What there has been is a lot of uncertainty which has held back
investment, understood. There has been issues with access to
finance which has prevented reallocation of capital, the natural
creative destruction, prevented good ideas being put to work,
we’re working on that.

Page 20
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech

And our view is that as those elements that were holding things
back start to be removed, the easy bit of the productivity pick-up
becomes more likely. And the easy bit is, in part, just using
existing capacity, low hanging fruit. The tougher bits of
productivity which, are and everyone here is well seized with
them, you know skills, development, infrastructure, R&D,
innovation, new market, all that, that takes a longer tale. But
we’re at the easier phase of a productivity pick-up right now is my
personal view, and that's consistent with our forecast.

Michael Saunders, Citigroup:

Governor, thank you for your speech. My question is you said
that if market rate expectations reach a level that threatens
growth, then the MPC would debate whether to add further
stimulus. Do you think we’re at that point or would that only come
into play if yields rise significantly further? And if you do decide to
add more stimulus would your preference be for a lower Bank
Rate or asset purchases, or something else?

Mark Carney:

Have you moved up here, Michael?

Michael Saunders, Citigroup:

Of course.

Mark Carney:

First time in Nottingham. If anyone is looking for some small,
medium sized enterprise finance Citi is here to provide it.

Laughter

Mark Carney:

Michael’s got a large briefcase. All good questions. All questions
that will get answered in the fullness of time by the MPC, in the
fullness of time. It’s not making a monetary policy
recommendation today.

Mike Kapur,
Signum Corporate Communications & CBI: You very eloquently have set out how you believe a strong,
stable banking sector is for SME lending. But if the Bank of

Page 21
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech

England were minded to, what would it do to increase the number
of players and products available in the SME lending space?

Mark Carney:

It is a very good question. We obviously don’t have that remit, as
you know. I mean we don’t have the specific mandate; it’s a
subject of debate actually in the Lords right now in the Banking
Bill about - in discharging our prudential responsibilities having
regard to competition in the sector. And the legislators will decide
that. We wouldn’t have the principal responsibility; we might have
some responsibility for that, supporting it. We’ll see.

So the question really gets into structural issues. I think the
question, one of the things that's being analysed pretty intensively
in the eurozone by the ECB, and others have raised it here so I’ll
mention it, is the potential role of securitisation in SME finance.
And I think that lots of - we give a lot of thought to securitisation
markets, development of securitisation markets. I think one has
to be a little careful about SME loans for securitisation just
because the nature of them, I referenced it but obliquely
referenced it, they tend to be floating rate, they tend to be short
term, people know that. And that doesn’t work well moving that sorry to be technical but moving that into a securitisation package.
So it’s not necessarily the right solution.

But on the other hand a securitisation - a well-functioning
securitisation market - does mean more efficient balance sheets
for the financial sector as a whole which frees up capacity, which
then can have a knock on effect.

But we have a lot of responsibilities at the Bank, and we’ll try to
keep focused on our core responsibilities without drifting into
those of others. But on the margin, in terms of making markets
work better, thinking about how regulation interplays with how
well certain products in certain sectors are served, we’ll think that
through and make adjustments as necessary. So thanks.

Page 22
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech

Alastair Cunningham:

Well thank you very much indeed for your questions. I think it’s
about time we wrapped up and got going through next door. So
thanks again.

Mark Carney:

Applause

END

Great. Thank you very much.

