“E-Commerce and the FX Market – have the promises been
met?”
Speech given by
Paul Fisher, Head of Foreign Exchange Division, Bank of England and Chair of Foreign
Exchange Joint Standing Committee
At the 4th Annual Foreign Exchange Markets Summit
19 January 2004

I am grateful to many colleagues at the Bank for comments and suggestions. In particular I would like to
thank Alexander Flatner for providing vital background research. Any views expressed in this speech are
those of the speaker and not necessarily those of the Bank of England.
.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

It’s a pleasure to be invited to address you this morning as the first keynote speaker at
this, the 4th Annual Foreign Exchange Markets Summit. In tackling the issues
surrounding the benefits of e-commerce this morning I am going to be wearing two
closely related hats.
First, as Head of the Foreign Exchange Division at the Bank of England, I am
interested in the developments in the foreign exchange market as they impact on our
own operations: these include management of the UK’s foreign exchange reserves,
with assets totalling some $45bn and management of the foreign currency elements of
the Bank of England’s balance sheet with assets totalling around $20bn. More
importantly, as a central banker, I am interested in how developments in the foreign
exchange market impact on the Bank’s core responsibilities for monetary and
financial stability and our role in promoting the effectiveness of financial markets.
My second hat – which is, as I said, closely related - is as Chairman of the Foreign
Exchange Joint Standing Committee (or FXJSC).
For those of you that don’t know much about the FXJSC and its work, a short history
may be helpful. This is not a total digression from the topic of this talk – you will see
that the impact of technology on the foreign exchange market is something that the
FXJSC has spent a great deal of time considering in the past and that e-commerce in
particular is very much a current topic of interest.
The Foreign Exchange Joint Standing Committee was formed in the autumn of 1973
as an initiative of both the banks and the broking community: specifically it was set
up at the request of what was then called the Foreign Exchange Committee (a
powerful group representing the banking community) and the Foreign Exchange and
Currency Deposit Brokers Association (the FECDBA). These two organisations were
engaged in some rather difficult negotiations over a wide range of issues, not least the
rate of brokerage which was then negotiated centrally for the market as a whole. The
FXJSC was established really to intermediate between the banks and the brokers, with
the Bank taking the chair and providing the secretary.
Throughout its 30 years of life the FXJSC has been heavily involved in drafting or
influencing the code of conduct for transactions in the wholesale market in foreign
exchange and that is now the bread and butter of the Committee’s work. As an overthe-counter, professional market, foreign exchange has always been regulated by a
code of conduct rather than legally-enforced supervision. Until the late 80s these
codes were published in the form of a letter to market participants from the chair of
the FEC. The details of those regimes need not bother us today but I briefly offer you
the following list covering the last 35 years or so which may jog some memories:
1967-1975
1975-1988
1988-2001
2001-to date

“the (Mr) Stirling letter”
“the O’Brien letter(s)/regime”
“the London Code of Conduct”
“the Non-Investment Products Code” known as the NIPs code.

Today, one of the prime responsibilities of the JSC is to review and maintain the NIPs
Code on behalf of the wholesale foreign exchange market in London. This initiative

2

came out of the creation of the Financial Services Authority which took on the Bank
of England’s supervisory and regulatory functions. But it was agreed that the foreign
exchange market should continue to be subject to a code of conduct and the foreign
exchange part of that code would be devised, published and maintained by the FXJSC
in consultation with other market groups (the NIPs code also covers the bullion
market and wholesale money market).
The Committee now comprises some 25 members including heads of foreign
exchange trading from 16 banks (formally chosen for their market knowledge and
experience, not to represent their institutions), 3 representatives of the broking
community including the WMBA, trade associations such as the Association of
Corporate Treasurers and the British Bankers Association. The Committee continues
to be supported by the Bank through the Chair and Secretaryship and, importantly, is
also attended by the FSA. Internationally the Committee has established good
contacts with seven committees in other centres: New York, Tokyo, Frankfurt,
Canada, Singapore, Hong Kong and Australia. But London remains the largest
foreign exchange market centre in the world. In the last BIS triennial survey some
32% of transactions in the global market were priced in London: twice the number in
the next largest centre (New York).
In addition to reviewing the NIPs code, the Committee has always kept a watchful eye
on developments in the structure of the foreign exchange market, especially those
related to technology associated with innovations in the market.
Going back through the files the following technology-related issues have attracted
the attention of the Committee:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Tape recording systems (1976)
Reuters Mark I and Mark II dealing systems (1977 onward)
‘Squawk boxes’ (1979)
London’s Telecoms infrastructure (1980)
Telex confirmation and automated confirmation systems (1980-84)
Relocation of back offices overseas (1994)
Herstatt risk (1994), the Allsopp report (1996), CLS (since)
Internet trading (1996 and onwards)
Y2K (1998&99)

All of these issues have been considered in terms of their impact on the market and
how it operates. E-commerce in the foreign exchange market has been a regular
discussion topic in the past two years with two separate sub-committee reports. The
latest can be found on the Bank’s internet site2 but a version is also available in the
Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin3 and I believe that the conference organisers have
kindly made that available in your packs.
The work of the Committee has therefore been of great help, not only to me with my
central banking hat on, but when, at events such as these, I am asked to try to answer

2
3

(http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/qb/qb030208.pdf)
Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin May 2003 (pp235-239)

3

the question posed in the title of my speech which I will now try to do, albeit from my
own perspectives.
Efficient and effective markets – for any good or service or financial product - are
essential to the economic welfare of society. I hope I don’t need to elaborate to this
audience that free, competitive markets are a key mechanism in ensuring that
resources are efficiently allocated between competing ends in our society. The
foreign exchange market is absolutely central to this process on a global scale. An
efficient foreign exchange market allows, of course, for goods and services to be
traded internationally. More importantly in the context of this conference, it
facilitates the cross-border trading of other financial instruments - equities, bonds,
credit derivatives etc - thus contributing to the efficient allocation of capital
internationally. As a general principle, the more efficient and effective the foreign
exchange market is in this function, the greater should be economic welfare in the
global economy as a whole.
The key question for this speech is whether new technology has delivered many
benefits and, from my perspectives, that means how it has impacted on the efficiency
and effectiveness of the market. I am going to take a pretty broad view of new
technology to include the following: electronic broking in the inter-bank market,
single-bank e-portals, multi-bank e-portals, and some of the related developments
such as prime brokerage and white labelling. Although only some of these can
strictly be called e-commerce, they are actually all intimately related. I also want to
say something about Continuous Linked Settlement.
To address these developments I am going to set out some of the key criteria that
might be used to evaluate any market development. There is no unique or definitive
approach to this that I am aware of, but my personal list certainly includes: liquidity,
transactions costs, operational risk, market risk management, settlement risks and
market integrity.
First, liquidity: A key question is whether any market development improves
liquidity. To be clear, what I mean is the ability to trade in size on demand without
substantially moving the price against the trader.
Transactions costs: The investment in new technology should naturally reduce cost
per transaction. I don’t include in this the cost of ‘failed trades’ – that comes next –
or the capital costs. What I mean is simply the physical systems cost of processing.
That includes the cost to end-users - or the buy-side if you prefer – and for that group,
the transactions costs include the profits being earned by the intermediary. As the
market gets more efficient and more competitive, bid-offer spreads should narrow and
the price for the end-user should get closer and closer to that in the inter-bank market.
For constant risk, that should represent an improvement in economic welfare.
Operational risk: given that the majority of foreign exchange trading is in relatively
simple products, the ‘failure’ rates that people have mentioned to me privately can be
surprisingly high. By a failed trade I mean, for example, disputed trades or nonmatching trade confirmations or other settlement errors. The costs of clearing up such
problems can be significant and the FXJSC used to spend a lot of time and effort in

4

helping to resolve disputes. I also include under operational risk the disruption to the
market caused by system crashes.
Market risk management: the importance of monitoring, analysing and managing risk
in financial markets is still very much a growth industry. Developments in trading
and settlement systems can help make risk management more effective e.g. by
speeding up the passing of deal information to the risk manager or providing more or
better quality information.
Settlement risk: in particular the so-called Herstatt risk which is the probability of a
counterparty defaulting at a point when one leg of a foreign exchange trade has been
paid away but the defaulting corresponding payment by the counterparty has not been
received. Reducing this form of settlement risk has been a key objective for central
banks for at least the past 10 years. I also include under this heading the more prosaic
risk arising from inappropriate legal agreements. A particular problem is caused by
the proliferation of very similar names but different legal entities within a single
corporate structure.
Market integrity: I mean by this the protection of confidential information about
clients, the quoting of true market prices, the absence of fraud or other criminal
activity etc. This is a subject which all trading operations have to be constantly alert
to, in order to protect both themselves and their clients.
I’m sure that many of you here could add to this list or provide me with a better
classification scheme, but let’s see whether this one captures the benefits and risks. I
should stress that most of what I am about to say is based on what I or colleagues hear
in discussion with those of you in the industry.
Considering the interbank electronic systems first, these are hardly new with Reuters
having been around for over 20 years – but it is obvious they remain absolutely key in
under-pinning the e-commerce platforms and so worthy of a few thoughts here. I
think it is clear that EBS and Reuters have become very impressive liquidity ‘pools’.
The number of transactions on both systems has been steadily rising in recent years,
despite continued consolidation in the interbank market generally, and, although
liquidity is sometimes concentrated e.g. around fix times, there has been little
evidence of significant price-gapping even when trading is hectic. Overall these
systems seem to have delivered clear benefits to the inter-bank market.
The counterpart to the efficiency of these systems is just how dependent on them the
industry has become. The volumes being traded every day are huge – EBS alone
averages some $90-$100bn a day and up to 700 trades a minute. When there are
systems or external communications problems – as happened a few times just recently
with EBS and in autumn 2002 on Reuters – the disruption, even from a few seconds
of broken links or a period of slow running, can be quite significant. These events
also serve as a timely reminder of how much the market relies on the robustness of the
surrounding telecommunications infrastructure – which was really the cause of EBS’
problems - not just the resilience of the systems themselves. The market may be
fortunate that it has two such systems operating in a competitive fashion with either
able to take over the business of the other should that be necessary.

5

Feeds from the inter-bank systems have, of course, become the main pricing source
for most of the e-trading portals. So the latter will be affected by any disruption in the
inter-bank market. We have – very occasionally I would stress - heard some reports
of banks having to shut down their pricing feeds to the e-portals because those feeds
were generating off-market prices. Like much new technology that people come to
depend on in everyday life, the benefits are huge, but it is when those benefits are
made unavailable - even temporarily - that they are really appreciated!
The single and multi-bank portals have been continuing to battle it out for market
share. If, in 2002, the talk was all about the multi-bank portals – with the lead
contenders benefiting from reducing numbers and each of the main platforms finding
their niche in the market - 2003 may well come to be seen as the year that single-bank
portals came of age. I can’t be specific because of commercial sensitivity, but we
have had reports of single bank e-trading platforms now handling the vast majority of
customer tickets within a firm and the largest share by value, with just the resulting
net position and the very biggest tickets worked by dealers through the market in the
traditional way. These systems are still developing and growing and the marketleading systems which invest in the best technology are almost certainly gaining
market share.
The choice between multi- and single-bank platforms is itself complicated. Some endusers who use multi-bank systems like the price transparency and the audit trail that
they provide. Others prefer the relationship with a single bank across a wide range of
products.
The fineness of pricing on the e-portals means that end-users are benefiting from
close to inter-bank market prices and this is creating a greater sense of transparency in
the market which would generally be welcomed. Of course there is a corresponding
risk: that very transparency and ease of access could attract the inexperienced or
unwary user and those who offer such platforms must take some responsibility for
how they are used and by whom.
Both single- and multi-bank portals appear able to generate a more flexible market,
for example opening up the door to multi-product and hence cross-market trading.
But it is clear that there is quite a long way to go yet before the full potential is
realised. Most of the systems, for example, are still based on ‘Request for Quote’ –
although there are now a growing number of systems which offer prices which can be
hit and this seems to be more popular with end-users. And the cross-market
functionality of existing systems is usually quite limited, although gradually
expanding.
Another innovation made possible by these e-commerce systems is the use of
‘intelligent’ software – a bit like on-board computers in formula one cars. Flow
analysis has been used to generate trading signals for banks’ own accounts for a
number of years and the next step is likely to be automating the trading process in
response to these signals.
Because these e-trading solutions can be implemented flexibly for individual
customers and don’t require special terminals they have the advantage of being
relatively easily connected to internal systems. Some well-known corporates have

6

used this to their advantage to enhance their straight-through-processing: reducing
costs and operational risk and, in the process, improving management information and
risk management more generally.
One of the features of the current market structure is that prices are still determined
largely in the inter-bank market. We have heard of two closely related issues here.
The first is the potential for a circularity problem: market-makers typically offer
prices and then lay off their risks in the inter-bank market. The growing liquidity
available in the e-portals could perhaps start to attract some activity away from the
inter-bank market, affecting the liquidity which feeds most of the e-portals in the first
place. This doesn’t appear to have become a live problem as yet but it is a widely
recognised concern. What does appear to be a live issue is the magnification of
liquidity. We hear examples of prices on EBS or Reuters that are good for, say,
$10mn being fed into, say, three portals for the same size at the same rate meaning
that $40mn is potentially being quoted for. This could mean that liquidity is being
under-priced systematically: the existence of many systems being fed from one price
source, could be a risk for the banks while the buy-side could find liquidity somewhat
fractured. However, I suspect that these risks will provide the motivation for change
and possibly further natural selection and so I expect any such concerns to be
temporary.
My general conclusion is that, despite these risks, both single- and multi-bank portals
have contributed substantial benefits, leading to a more efficient and effective market,
especially for the buy-side.
Prime brokerage and white labelling have been two of the hot topics over the past
year, depending in large part on the growth of the e-commerce systems. Both deliver
clear benefits to the provider and the user. White labelling allows the larger banks to
earn revenue streams to set against the largely fixed cost of their e-trading systems –
which must promote greater investment and further efficiency gains at least in the
most successful systems. The smaller banks effectively out-source their technology
getting the advantage of high quality systems at a reduced cost, the benefits of which
they can pass on to their customers. The smaller bank can also take price feeds from
the larger bank although I understand that an element of choice is usually available as
to whether to take prices for all or only some currency pairs and there can be
reciprocal arrangements in pricing e.g. for an exotic currency in which the smaller
bank specialises.
As long as there remain a sufficient number of systems to ensure competition, the
advantages of economies of scale from white labelling are fairly clear. Interestingly,
the effects on industry consolidation may be less clear cut than one first imagines –
the smaller banks may be able to use the out-sourced systems and liquidity to help
retain their markets with, for example, the smaller or more specialised clients.
Prime brokerage generates a similar gain in respect of the more efficient use of
balance sheets and credit, again earning the larger banks a revenue stream while
reducing costs for the fund managers or smaller banks and others who are the main
users of such arrangements. What are the risks here? In both white labelling and
prime brokerage, there is a distancing of the end-user from the direct supplier of
liquidity and credit respectively. The supplier banks must ask themselves – are they

7

pricing liquidity and credit too cheaply? Are they really sure they know what risks
they are exposed to? If something goes wrong with white-labelled technology, who is
going to take responsibility (think Railtrack and the carriers!) Is there a concentration
of liquidity and credit risk which is going unnoticed? Who has the incentive to carry
out checks to ‘know your customer’?
The final development I want to say something about is Continuous Linked
Settlement (CLS). A major milestone in risk reduction in the foreign exchange
market, this initiative is fast becoming a market standard. Unlike the other
technology improvements, CLS has slightly increased direct transactions costs in
order to significantly reduce settlement risk. I have also heard that the use of CLS has
quite significantly reduced the number of settlement errors and the savings from this,
as well as the reduction of Herstatt risk, must be set against the direct costs.
On the other hand, the rapid take-up of CLS also creates a new risk due to the possible
single point of failure. On the one occasion when there was a significant glitch last
year the consequences created a problem of some scale: the subsequent smooth cleanup operation however, did much to demonstrate sound contingency arrangements.
Resilience clearly needs to be a watchword for any system which becomes part of the
market infrastructure and I know the CLS management take this very seriously.
Despite the residual or new risks, CLS must be regarded as a major step forward in
the market.
I haven’t said much about market integrity. Initial fears about internet security seem
to have been largely overcome but I can’t help thinking that new technology of any
sort will always have plus and minus points. On the positive side, automated systems
allow quicker, fuller and better quality management information and more complex
security features which should help to keep the market clean as well as efficient. On
the other hand the opportunities to exploit technology to help wrong-doing tend to rise
proportionately. To take me back to my starting point I see it as essential that codes
of conduct for foreign exchange trading are kept up to speed with new technology and
that is one reason why the FXJSC and the other market practices committees overseas
must keep their eyes on the e-commerce ball.

8

