Economic policy, with and without forecasts
Speech given by
Sir Alan Budd, member of the Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee

Given at the Sir Alec Cairncross Lecture
November 1998

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Economic policy, with and without forecasts

In this speech,(1) Sir Alan Budd, a member of the Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee, discusses the debate
between those who believe that monetary policy should be based on a small number of current indicators
and those who use model-based forecasts to assist their decisions. He argues that all policy-makers use
forecasts, implicitly or explicitly, and all respond to current indicators. He describes the role of the
inflation forecast in the MPC’s decisions.
My topic this evening is the use of forecasts in economic
policy-making in general and their use by the Bank of
England’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) in particular.

In August,(3) he discussed the MPC’s concern with the
output gap, and records his preference for monitoring
nominal demand. He said:

Although this lecture is dedicated to Alec Cairncross, the
first part of it is devoted to, or perhaps directed at, another
economist whom I greatly admire and respect, namely
Samuel Brittan. I am particularly sorry that he is not here
this evening. It would clearly be grossly ill-mannered to
conduct a dispute with him in his absence, so I hope that it
will be recognised that I want to question some views about
forecasting that are widely shared, and of which
Samuel Brittan is certainly the most eloquent, and possibly
the most influential, exponent.

‘As an immediate step I would give more weight to actual
inflation as distinct from rarefied speculation about its trend
in two years’ time’.

I shall start with some quotations taken from recent
columns and articles by Mr Brittan.
First, a few extracts from an Economic Viewpoint in May of
this year:(2)

Finally, two quotations from his article ‘An Inflation Target
is Not Enough’.(4) Again, this article is mainly about his
view that monetary policy should be directed at nominal
GDP (ie total spending in the economy), rather than at
inflation alone. That is an important issue, but I do not
intend to discuss it now. But his remarks are highly
relevant to the more general issue that concerns me.
‘There is no perfect solution; but it would help to go more
by actual evidence of inflation and less by forecasts and
models...’
He goes on:

‘But the signal for middle-of-the-road opinion to swing
towards the hawks is unlikely to be the minutiae of the
forecast path for ... output to which the [Bank of England’s]
Inflation Report devotes such loving care’.
He goes on to say that support for an interest rate increase
would most probably come from an increase in interest
rates by the US Federal Reserve. He says:
‘This may not be entirely rational, but it is hardly less so
than the supposedly scientific forecasting in which the more
academic members of the MPC prefer to indulge’.
He concludes:
‘Someone who is suspicious of forecasts is not committed
to ignoring clear forward-looking information, of the kind
we had when oil prices rose fourfold in 1973. But a
rational sceptic prefers current data to prognostications
about the implications of slight variations in demand and
output two years ahead.’
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

‘National cash objectives can indeed be pursued by
means of formal forecasts and with a heavy fine-tuning
emphasis. But they can also be pursued in a way which
puts less reliance on forecasting abilities and reduces the
need for an econometric straitjacket. Indeed a nominal
demand objective has one advantage not sufficiently
stressed by its adherents. That is, it can enable us to rely
less on forecasting ability. For it would not be disastrous if
the best we could do would be to react to the current
situation’.
The view being expressed here is that it is better to conduct
policy on the basis of observing a few actual variables than
on forecasts derived from econometric models.
There are important substantive issues here, but first I
want to clear up a matter of semantics. I would assert
that all actions undertaken with the intention of affecting
future outcomes involve forecasting. The only questions
are:

Given at the Sir Alec Cairncross Lecture for the Institute of Contemporary British History and the St Peter’s College Foundation, 27 October.
Brittan, S, Economic Viewpoint, Financial Times, 14 May 1998.
Brittan, S, Economic Viewpoint, Financial Times, 6 August 1998.
Brittan, S, ‘An Inflation Target is Not Enough’, Essays, Moral, Political and Economic, Hume Papers on Public Policy, Volume 6, No 4, 1998.

379

Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin: November 1998

●

are the forecasts implicit or explicit?

●

which variables are taken into account in producing
the forecasts?

●

how are the forecasts derived from the variables?

I would add that all forecasts depend on observations of
actual variables (either current or past). We all react to the
current situation, the only question is how we do so.
The context in which I shall be discussing economic
forecasts is the control of inflation (although similar
arguments would apply if I were discussing the control of
unemployment or the balance of payments). I hope it is
common ground that inflation responds to economic
developments with a lag. (Though there are some changes,
eg changes in indirect taxes, that can affect the price level
immediately.) Thus, policy actions taken today will affect
inflation over a period of up to two years or more. It
follows that anyone taking policy actions to control inflation
must, at least implicitly, be thinking about the effects on
inflation in the future, ie they are forecasting.
I should mention at this point that when I circulated an
earlier version of this paper to my colleagues at the Bank of
England, Mervyn King kindly drew my attention to
comments by Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan
made at the Bank of England’s Tercentenary Symposium on
The Future of Central Banking.(1) As a mere Treasury
official I was not, of course, invited to that Symposium, nor
had I read Alan Greenspan’s comments; but I found that he
had summarised, in a few sentences, most of the ideas that I
shall be presenting this evening. I have often owned up to
the charge of subconscious plagiarism, but I think this is the
first time that I have committed an act of psychic
plagiarism.
Alan Greenspan was commenting on a paper by another of
my colleagues, Charles Goodhart. Greenspan’s words were:
‘Implicit in any monetary policy action or inaction is an
expectation of how the future will unfold, that is, a
forecast’.
He was particularly referring to those who favoured simple
rules of policy-making. He went on:
‘The belief that some formal set of rules for policy
implementation can effectively eliminate that problem is, in
my judgment, an illusion. There is no way to avoid making
a forecast, explicitly or implicitly’.
In relation to monetary rules, he commented:
‘I am not saying that monetary aggregates are without value,
or that intermediate targets should not be sought. I am

saying that their use requires a forecast just as much as the
broader, so-called discretionary policy procedures’.
It could be said that I have defined forecasting very
widely—to include any form of thinking about the future—
whereas we all know an economic forecast when we see
one, and plenty of policy-makers do perfectly well
without them. My reply is that we do indeed use the
expression ‘economic forecast’ to describe a table of
numbers (or a set of charts) showing the future values of
economic variables. But it can be misleading to think
that those who base their policy actions on such tables
and charts are behaving in a fundamentally different way
from those who do not. All policy actions in relation to
inflation, for example, must depend on a response to
observations of events and on some idea (however vague
and uncertain) of how today’s policy will affect the future
path of inflation.
Some of you may by now be thinking that all this talk
about forecasting is beside the point. Surely what I am
really talking about is policy reaction functions. The
question at issue is, how does the policy-maker respond to
new information? So we could transfer our discussion into
one about the nature of the reaction function. How many
variables are involved? What use is made of formal
transformations of these variables etc? And one is tempted
to say, ‘If it’s the forecast that upsets you, we can leave it
out’. A reaction function is a mapping from a set of
observations to a policy decision. If the decision-making
process of the MPC was entirely automatic, we could ask
the computer to print out just one number, the interest rate
required to achieve the Government’s inflation target.
The forecast would strictly be an incidental by-product of
the policy-making process. Instead of saying that the
decision is based on a forecast of inflation two years ahead
(or whatever), we could say (correctly) that the decision is
based on our current reaction to observations. That would
also have the benefit of demonstrating that the distinction
between those (sturdy realists) who base their policy
actions on current observations and those (airy-fairy
academics) who base them on forecasts is not very helpful.
We all use current (and past) observations, since that is all
we have.
Having said all that, I am going to have to explain why the
MPC does use explicit economic forecasts, and I shall do so
in due course. But having, I hope, resolved a question of
semantics, let me move on to the substantive issue, which
concerns the nature of the reaction functions. I have found
it difficult to find suitable labels to describe the two
approaches (and at any rate it is really a continuum), but I
suggest ‘hedgehogs’ and ‘foxes’, from Tolstoy’s remark that
the fox knows many things but the hedgehog knows one big
thing. So my hedgehogs rely on a few variables and my
foxes rely on rather more variables and will possibly use
formal methods to transform some or all of them into a
forecast or an actual decision. (I think, incidentally, that this

(1) Greenspan, A, Discussion of Goodhart, C, Capie, F and Schnadt, N, ‘The development of central banking’, in Capie, F, Goodhart, C, Fischer, S and
Schnadt, N (ed) The Future of Central Banking, Cambridge University Press, 1994.

380

Economic policy, with and without forecasts

is not yet another contribution to the ‘rules versus
discretion’ debate, since either side may or may not believe
in rules.)
On the face of it, it seems strange that anyone should
suggest that it is better to base decisions on a small number
rather than a large number of observations of current and
past economic variables. How can more mean worse?
Analogies are always unfair, but I am going to use one all
the same. Suppose that one was being driven from A to B,
where B is a well-defined but unfamiliar destination. How
would one react if the driver announced at the outset that he
favoured a simple approach to route-finding—he only read
road signs that were on the right-hand side of the road, or
that were wholly in upper-case letters, or that began with
consonants? You might believe that you would reach your
destination eventually, but you would fear that it was not the
best way to proceed. Suppose, on the other hand, that the
driver produced a map. A map is, of course, a gross
over-simplification of the real world, and no two maps of
any given area seem to be the same—there are different
scales, different colours, different details and so on. But
despite all this, you might be reassured by this abstract
device. And you might be even more encouraged if the
driver told you he intended to combine the use of the map
with attention to road signs etc. Now let us take the analogy
further. Suppose you set off and the driver leapt out every
few hundred yards and measured the temperature of the
road surface; or suppose he told you that at each road
sign he converted the letters to their numerical equivalent
and used a complicated formula to derive the desired
direction, you might reasonably believe that these
procedures would reduce the chance of your reaching the
destination.
Is it this fear that leads people to condemn the use of formal
models and a wide range of information in policy-making?
If this is so, it would be a sad commentary on the large
amount of time and money that has been spent on
developing econometric models and on improving economic
statistics over the past 30 years or so. In preparing this
lecture, I re-read the 1966 Report from the Estimates
Committee on The Government Statistical Services.(1)
(As is so often the case, I found I had mis-remembered it
after the gap of 25 years since I last looked at it.) The
Committee recommended that ‘urgent steps be taken to
increase research on forecasting methods and on the data
used in forecasting both by Government and by outside
bodies with Government Support and co-operation’.
In its written evidence to the Committee, the Treasury
discussed the use of statistics in the analysis and forecasting
of the domestic economy. It said:
‘The quality of the analysis has been very much improved
by a large-scale and very rapid improvement, amounting to
a transformation, in the range and reliability of statistics,
and the speed with which they are produced’.

It went on:
‘The counterpart of the improved flow of statistics, and the
now quite long historical runs, has been an improvement in
interpretation. To some extent, the improvement consists of
a more sophisticated assessment of what such and such a
figure means. In addition, a number of research studies
have been carried out into the nature of the key
relationships; some of these have been published in the
National Institute Economic Review. More generally, as
time goes on and as statistics improve, the whole process of
analysis and forecasting gets continually more refined,
explicit and skilful’.
Alec Cairncross gave evidence to the Sub-Committee on
Economic Affairs (which was conducting the study) on
25 January 1966, and was willing to share some of this
optimism. He was asked by the chairman (Dr Jeremy Bray)
whether he agreed that the measure of quality in forecasting
was the quality of ultimate control that it makes possible,
rather than the accuracy of plus or minus 2% in the outturn.
He replied:
‘I think this is so. I think it is the degree to which you can
operate on the economy in the light of the forecasts, and
here I think we have made a very definite improvement’.
He referred in particular to the development of techniques
for measuring the impact on the economy of changes in
government policy. However, as one might expect, this
optimism was accompanied by a considerable degree of
caution. Alec was asked about research on forecasting
outside the Treasury. He replied:
‘We have tried to interest universities in this, not always
very successfully because I think it does require a very
thorough knowledge of the statistical material. A good
many would like to do it the short way by taking the figures
and working on the figures, but most of the time you have to
devote to studying whether the figures mean what they seem
to mean before you can do any useful research at all, and
this is why on occasion we have found attempts to interest
the universities rather unsuccessful or unfruitful’.
Let us file away those wise words for future reference, and
return to the hedgehogs and foxes. Let us imagine an
extreme hedgehog position. The task is to control inflation;
the only variable that contains any information about the
future rate of inflation is the current rate of inflation.
Therefore, policy-makers should tighten policy when
inflation moves above its target rate and relax it when it falls
below. (An alternative extreme hedgehog position is to state
that only the growth of the money supply contains any
information about the future rate of inflation.) The foxes
believe that there is a wide range of variables (which they
call ‘information variables’) that provide information about
the future rate of inflation. Who is right? I personally am
convinced by all the studies that show that if we are

(1) Estimates Committee, Fourth Report, Government Statistical Services, HC 246, 1966.

381

Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin: November 1998

concerned with forecasting, foxes do better than hedgehogs.
So why do the hedgehogs disagree? I think that there are a
number of reasons why the debate continues. They are
related to policy-making rather than to forecasting itself. I
shall list them briefly with some comments, and I shall
return to some of the points when I discuss the operation of
the MPC.

observations of the relevant variables to the policy actions.
Why then does the MPC produce and publish a forecast of
inflation (which has now been joined by a forecast of
output)? I think there is an internal reason and an external
one. The internal one is concerned with the quality of the
decision we take; the external one is concerned with
explaining that decision to the public.

One reason is that the hedgehogs accuse the foxes of
cheating. They will always find another figure (for a
hitherto ignored economic variable) that allows
policy-makers to postpone making an unpopular decision.
That is really an aspect of the rules versus discretion debate.
We can all agree that bad discretion is worse than good
rules.

The immediate point is that we do not rely wholly on formal
methods to reach decisions. The production of the forecast
allows us to bring formal and informal methods together.
As my colleague John Vickers pointed out in a recent
lecture in Frankfurt,(1) the econometric model that is used in
the Bank to help produce the forecasts uses about 150
economic variables; but each month, the MPC is presented
with information on a thousand or so variables. If we
believe that the variables that are not included in the model
are relevant to our decisions, we obviously want to take
them into account. There are considerable advantages to
using the forecast as a framework for doing this. For one
thing, it gives us a language with which we are familiar. We
are used to watching an economy unfold and thinking about
how it will develop in the future. We also have some ideas
about the normal ranges within which an economy will
behave (although of course we can all be greatly surprised
from time to time). Thus if we think there is important new
information in a non-model variable, we can examine the
plausibility of the effect that it might have on the future path
of inflation, and hence its possible implications for our
decision. Finally, the model allows us to take account of the
complex interactions within the economy, so that we can
assess how changes in one part of the economy will change
the overall picture. But we remain able to modify those
effects if we believe we should do so.

Another charge is that the foxes rely excessively on models,
without fully understanding the data on which they are
based. (That was the fear expressed by Alec Cairncross.)
There is the related charge that the foxes have an exalted
view of their ability to control inflation, and therefore
indulge in excessive fine-tuning. There are really two
different versions of this charge. The first, which was
propounded by Milton Friedman, states that policy-makers
do not have superior information about future cyclical
movements in the economy. Their attempts at stabilisation
(either for its own sake or as a means of controlling
inflation) will therefore make matters worse. There is a
more recent version, which will be discussed by my
colleague Charles Goodhart in the Keynes Lecture in two
days’ time. He examines the argument that if our
knowledge of the economy is subject to a particular kind of
uncertainty—known as Brainard uncertainty—large changes
in policy in response to changes in the expected rate of
inflation could cause an undesirable increase in the volatility
of inflation. Charles discusses the issue in relation to the
observed frequency of policy changes, particularly policy
reversals. I shall not anticipate his conclusions.
Since these types of argument are based on policy-making
rather than on forecasting on its own, there is no satisfactory
way of resolving them. We would have to run through
history twice, once with the hedgehogs in charge and once
with the foxes in charge, and compare the outcomes. As a
possible substitute, we can conduct synthetic experiments;
but that requires us to use models, and we may not be able
to agree about them.
Let me move on to the use of economic forecasts by the
MPC. I should emphasise that the following account
represents my own views, which may or may not be shared
by my colleagues. We are all individually responsible for
our own decisions, and are free to use the forecasts to
inform our decisions in the way we think best.
I mentioned earlier that the production of an explicit
forecast is not a necessary part of policy-making if we rely
on a formal reaction function. We can go straight from the

I have referred to the econometric model. In fact, the Bank
uses a suite of models, and we use our intuition and
theoretical understanding to decide which particular model
is appropriate to thinking about current circumstances. We
can also develop ad hoc models to explore the implications
of particular developments. For example, understanding the
implications of a possible credit crunch might require a
special model. The suite of models enables us to put
together components from different models to construct an
appropriate forecasting model each quarter. (One could use
the analogy of hedgehogs and foxes to distinguish between
those who rely on one big model and those who rely on
many small models. The Bank is very much a fox on this
definition.)
The process of policy-making that I am describing
represents a particular way of using a reaction function.
Instead of going straight from the observations to the
decision, we stop the process in the middle. We go from
one set of observations to a formally produced forecast, and
we then adjust that forecast in the light of all other
information that we believe is relevant. (In practice, even
the more formal part of the process involves a considerable

(1) ‘Inflation targeting in practice: the UK experience’, given at the Conference on Implementation of Price Stability, 11–12 September 1998.
See pages 368–75.

382

Economic policy, with and without forecasts

amount of judgment.) This is very fox-like behaviour. It is
obviously not the only way of reaching policy decisions.
Many authorities do not produce any type of explicit
forecast. Others may publish or use a ‘staff forecast’. Such
a forecast will have been produced, using a combination of
formal and informal methods, by the staff of the central
bank (or finance ministry). It may inform the decision, but
the policy-makers are not responsible for, or committed to,
the forecast itself.
That is not, in my view, the current position. The forecast
represents the collective view of the MPC members. It is
not necessarily anyone’s individual forecast, nor is it the
average of the individual forecasts. If the MPC was told to
go away until it had produced a single forecast, this is the
forecast it would produce after discussion and a willingness
to accept some compromise.
Does the forecast imply a decision? The practical answer is
clearly not. At the time of the February inflation forecast,
the Committee was divided four-four on whether interest
rates should be raised. At the time of the August inflation
forecast, seven members voted for no change, one voted for
a cut and one voted for an increase. So it is clearly possible
to produce a collective forecast and yet disagree about the
interest rate decision. Why does this happen? It is for
individual members to explain their actions, but I would
make one general point. I have said that we stop the
process of decision-making—the process of applying our
reaction function—in the middle, in order to incorporate a
wider range of information about the economy. But a
reaction function consists of two things, a model of the
economy and a welfare (or loss) function.

why interest rates were not raised, even though the
associated commentary said that it was more likely than not
that interest rates would have to be raised to meet the
inflation target.
So even if there is agreement about the forecast, there is no
simple mapping from the forecast to the policy decision.
This all smacks of fox-like behaviour. How do we meet the
criticisms made by the hedgehogs? I said that the
publication of the forecast serves the external purpose of
explaining our decisions to the public. The Inflation Report
is designed to fulfil the requirement imposed on the MPC
by the Bank of England Act to publish a quarterly report
containing:
(i)

a review of the monetary policy decisions taken by the
MPC in the previous three months;

(ii)

an assessment of the developments in inflation in the
United Kingdom over the same period; and

(iii) an indication of the expected approach to meeting its
inflation objective.
The Act does not require the MPC to publish a forecast of
inflation, but we believe that it is right to continue the
practice started by the Bank when the Inflation Report
provided its independent assessment of the government’s
actions. (The system set up by Norman Lamont after the
United Kingdom left the ERM in 1992.)

The Government has given the MPC a loss function that,
reasonably enough, is not precisely specified. The objective
is clearly defined: the target ‘at all times’ is a twelve-month
inflation rate of retail prices excluding mortgage interest
payments of 21/2%. But the Chancellor’s letter setting out
the remit also says:

The forecasts for inflation and GDP provide not only a
central projection but also the MPC’s assessment of the
probability distribution around the central projection. The
public is free to comment on and criticise the projections. It
can assess the views that informed the MPC’s decisions. I
believe that the process of publication reduces the chance
that we shall succumb to the failings of which the
hedgehogs accuse us.

‘The framework takes into account that any economy at
some point can suffer from external events or temporary
difficulties, often beyond its control. The framework is
based on the recognition that the actual inflation rate will on
occasions depart from its target as a result of shocks and
disturbances. Attempts to keep inflation at the inflation
target in these circumstances may cause undesirable
volatility in output’.

Shall we cheat? Time will tell. But the fact that we provide
a detailed account of the material we consider, and a full
account of the MPC’s deliberations, should reduce the risk.
More importantly, the MPC’s remit of controlling inflation
should remove the risk that we are tempted to exploit the
short-run trade-off between growth and inflation.

There is room for disagreement about what constitutes
‘undesirable volatility’. Also, as John Vickers pointed out in
his Frankfurt lecture, there is room for disagreement about
whether policy should be directed at the mean, the mode or
the median of the probability distribution of future inflation
rates. (That depends on the nature of the loss function for
deviations of inflation from its target.) Finally, there is the
issue, to which I have already referred, that is the subject of
Charles Goodhart’s forthcoming Keynes Lecture. The
possible costs of policy reversals were specifically discussed
in the minutes of the February meeting as one of the reasons

Are we so obsessed with our model-building skills that we
fail to analyse what the numbers mean? In reply to that, I
would repeat that the forecasts are only partly model-based.
We are entirely free to adjust them in the light of additional
information, and we do so. We also devote considerable
time to trying to understand what the data mean. And I
think that hedgehogs may be equally open to the charge that
they do not fully understand the data they use.
Do we have an inflated view of our ability to control
inflation? The Inflation Report, uniquely, shows the
probability distribution of the inflation forecast (a system
383

Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin: November 1998

pioneered by my colleague Mervyn King). The August
Report suggests that the 50% confidence band for inflation
in the third quarter of 2000 is about 1.9% to 3.3%. That is,
there is a 50–50 chance that inflation will lie outside that
range. I do not know whether that is excessively modest or
excessively boastful, but we are certainly not claiming that
we know precisely what inflation will be in two years’ time.
Are we tempted into excessive fine-tuning? You must listen
to Charles Goodhart, but I recall that the usual comment on
the past conduct of monetary policy is that it has veered
between ‘too little, too late’ and ‘too much, too late’.

●

there is a substantive issue concerning the number of
economic variables that should be used to inform policy
decisions. Policy-making supported by formal
model-based forecasts typically use more ‘information
variables’ than policy-making based on simple rules;
and

●

there are a number of risks associated with the use of
large formal models in policy-making.

●

no one can make policy decisions relating to the control
of inflation without making a forecast, implicitly or
explicitly;

The Monetary Policy Committee uses a suite of models, and
relies on a very wide range of supplementary information to
guide its decisions. The production of an inflation forecast
is not, technically, a necessary part of the decision-taking
process, but it provides a valuable framework for discussion
and the publication of the forecast also enhances
transparency—its approach should minimise the risk that it
places more weight on formal models than they can bear.

●

the distinction between relying on forecasts and on
current observations to make policy decisions is invalid;
a forecast is simply a particular transformation of
current (and past) observations;

These are early days, and I am sure that the MPC will learn
from experience and adapt its techniques accordingly; but I
hope I have demonstrated that we are seeking to combine
the best qualities of hedgehogs and foxes.

I have tried this evening to make the following points:

384

