Association of Business Community Dinner, Scotland
Speech given by
The Rt Hon Sir Edward George, Governor of the Bank of England

14 January 2002

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2
Mr Chairman, it gives me particular pleasure to be with you all this evening. I am honoured to join
you in paying tribute to Mr Yaqub Ali and in celebrating the remarkable contribution that he has
made to Scottish commercial and community life since he arrived here from Pakistan some 50 years
ago.
It is a very poignant occasion, coming as it does when the terrorist attacks of 11th September in New
York and Washington are still fresh in our minds. Those events sadly have been sometimes
represented – or misrepresented – as having something to do with ethnic or religious differences.
But, as the universal condemnation of terrorism which followed the events of 11th September has
shown, they had nothing to do with ethnic or religious differences; they were a reflection of a
fanaticism which has no place in any civilised society. Nevertheless they have the capacity to
accentuate perceived ethnic and religious differences, and to provoke unwanted tensions within our
international, national and local communities.
The contrast between this concern and the example and experience of Mr Ali, which we celebrate
this evening, could not be more pronounced. Whatever the difficulties he faced – of social
disadvantage having arrived here after some time spent in refugee camps in Pakistan, and no doubt,
too, of some degree of ethnic prejudice – Mr Ali overcame them. Beginning as a door-to-door
salesman he moved on to build a series of substantial businesses – as you have heard – not simply to
his own benefit but to the great benefit, in terms of both the goods and services, and the employment
which he provided to the community which adopted him. But, beyond this impressive business
achievement, he has made a great contribution in terms of community service and charitable
involvement both here in the UK and in relation to Pakistan.
All of this says a great deal about Mr Ali – and Mr Ali, I join with others in saluting you, and
congratulating you on your personal achievements. But your example conveys a wider message for
all of us. It illustrates very vividly the great benefit that can accrue to our society as a whole from
providing the opportunity to all the people in the UK, whatever their background, to realise their full
potential and achieve all that they can in whatever field they choose. It underscores the importance
of non-discrimination, whether ethnic or religious, sexual or social, to the material as well as the
moral progress of our whole community. It is that which makes it such a particular pleasure to be
here this evening.
Mr Ali’s achievements are, as I say, an outstanding demonstration of the great contribution that
ethnic minority business – given the proper opportunity and encouragement – can make to our
economy. But I am very conscious, Mr Chairman, that Mr Ali is not the only example. The Bank of
England’s investigation some 18 months ago into the availability of finance to ethnic minority firms
suggested that while the ethnic minorities represent some 5% of the UK population, they controlled
some 7% of UK businesses and accounted for around 9% of new business start-ups. Those figures
relate to 1997, so they are a little out of date; but they nevertheless make the point, which is
underlined by the presence of so many business people here this evening. But I am very conscious,
too, Mr Chairman, from the economic reports which I receive each month from our Agent here in
Glasgow, Janet Bulloch, that many of you have for some time been facing a very tough economic
environment. So perhaps I might take advantage of being here to say a few words about that.
If you look at the overall macro-economic situation in the UK as a whole we have much to be
thankful for. We’ve had – over the past nearly 10 years now – the longest period of relatively steady
quarter by quarter growth since quarterly records began in 1955; unemployment – though it has
edged up recently – is still just about as low as it has been for 25 years, and we’ve enjoyed the
longest period of consistently low inflation – and interest rates – that anyone can remember. And all
of that is broadly true not just for the UK as a whole but for every individual region of the UK –
including here in Scotland.

3
Our problem – and it is a real problem for us at the Bank, as it is for you – is that, once you look
beneath the apparently benign surface of the economy as a whole, you find very substantial
differences between many internationally-exposed businesses, particularly in manufacturing but
including farming and some services businesses, which have been having a very tough time recently,
and businesses serving the domestic market which have been doing relatively well. There are two
main reasons for the pressure on the businesses exposed to international competition - the puzzlingly
persistent weakness of the euro, not just against sterling but also against the US dollar; and the sharp
slowdown in demand over the past year or so in all the major industrial economies.
Now with the best will in the world there is not much that either we at the Bank or the UK
Government can do to address the causes of these pressures. That’s obvious where we are talking
about demand in the US or Japan or the Euro-zone: we can urge their respective authorities to
stimulate their economies at international meetings, but we can’t do anything about it directly
ourselves. It’s less obvious in the case of the exchange rate – people think that we could influence
that quite simply by cutting our interest rate relative to interest rates in the Euro-zone. But I would
point out to you that it’s not in fact as easy as that. The US has reduced its interest rate far more
aggressively than the ECB over the past year but the dollar is stronger against the Euro than it was to
begin with; and the same is true, to a lesser degree, of us here in the UK, with sterling also stronger
against the euro than it was a year ago.
So, for the time being, external demand remains weak, and there is nothing much – as I say – that we
can do about that. What we can do, given that inflation remains under control, is to try to
compensate for that weakness by stimulating domestic demand here in the UK. The Bank has done
this by cutting interest rates to buoy up consumer spending. And the Government has stepped up its
own spending, which is actually helpful in the present environment. Although we have not been able
to avoid an overall slowdown altogether, we have in this way, so far, managed to keep the UK
economy as a whole moving forward, even though we could not avoid recession in some of the
internationally-exposed sectors. And that has meant a particularly tough time for those parts of the
UK in which these sectors are most heavily concentrated, including parts of Scotland.
We would all have felt a good deal more comfortable if we could have done more to sustain demand
in the internationally-exposed sectors. But as I say that option was not available to us. Stimulating
domestic demand to offset the external weakness was the only effective option we had – and while it
was very much a second-best course of action, and not without its own risks, it has seemed to us
better than not responding at all. That would have meant a much sharper slowdown, and probably
recession, in the economy as a whole. And given that inflation was already modestly below our
target, it would have meant a quite unnecessary loss of overall output – and income and employment.
So in effect we have taken the view that unbalanced growth in our present situation is better than no
growth – or as some commentators have put it, a two speed economy is better than a no-speed
economy.
At some point the world economy will begin to recover – indeed there are some tentative signs that
the US and Eurozone economies are now beginning to bottom out, and that they could begin to pick
up from the summer, perhaps to around trend by the end of the year. And the euro, which has, as I
say, been puzzlingly weak since soon after its introduction 3 years ago, still seems likely to
strengthen eventually. When we reach that point – when it becomes clearer that the international
environment really is improving, and that external demand really is picking up - then we can look
forward to better balanced growth in our economy. That will in due course mean that domestic
demand growth – and consumer demand growth in particular – will need to moderate if we are to
avoid a build up of inflationary pressure. But let me be quite clear – that’s not a warning, still less is
it a threat. It is really a matter of arithmetic! It is quite possible that the necessary moderation – and
I emphasise the word moderation – of consumer demand will come about of its own accord, given
the gradual increase in unemployment we are currently seeing and the build-up of household debt

4
that would be the best possible outcome. But if consumer spending were not to moderate of its
own accord, we would clearly need at some point to consider raising interest rates, to bring about
that moderation. I do not suggest that the timing of any such move is imminent - that would
obviously depend upon the timing and the strength of the pick up in external demand.
So, Mr Chairman, the past year or so has been a difficult time for the world economy which has
made life increasingly difficult for the internationally-exposed sectors of our own economy. And
that situation may persist for the next few months. But it won’t last forever. I am reasonably
optimistic that the overseas environment will improve as we move through the New Year, and that
by this time next year we here in the UK will have seen a return to somewhat stronger and better
balanced growth with unemployment not too far above its historic lows and continuing low inflation.
If that is how things turn out we will have weathered the storm as well as we could reasonably have
expected.
Let me conclude, Mr Chairman, by once more congratulating you Mr Ali on your outstanding
example, and by inviting you, on behalf of the Association of Business Community to accept this
vase as a token of the high esteem in which you are held by us all.
ENDS

