Energy and Environmental Challenges in the New Global
Economy
Speech given by
Andrew Sentence, Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England

At the British Institute of Energy Economics Sustainable Energy Seminar, BIS Conference
Centre, London
21 September 2009

I would like to thank Michael Hume, Abi Hughes and Neil Meads for research assistance and I am
also grateful for helpful comments from other colleagues. The views expressed are my own and do
not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of England or other members of the Monetary Policy
Committee.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

I am delighted to have the opportunity to give the keynote address at this seminar
convened by the British Institute of Energy Economics. I am also very pleased to be
able to give this speech against a much more positive economic backdrop than would
have been the case this time last year. Not only have we had a respite from the major
financial shocks which hit us last autumn and the year before. But the latest evidence
suggests that the UK and other major economies are starting to recover from the deep
recession triggered by the global financial crisis.

As growth resumes, attention is now shifting to what the recovery will be like and the
challenges it will bring. There are clearly major challenges relating to the financial
system and its ability to support a strong rebound in global growth. There are also
issues surrounding the way in which global financial imbalances might evolve over
the recovery.

But a resumption in global economic growth also poses important energy and
environmental challenges. Before the recession, the period of global growth in the
mid-2000s saw very strong upward pressure on energy prices and heightened energy
price volatility. Indeed, energy price volatility has continued through the recession,
with the oil price falling back from nearly $150/barrel to around $40/barrel earlier this
year, before moving up to its current trading level of around $70. Swings in energy
prices have had significant impacts on business costs and consumer price inflation in
the UK and many other economies.

So one important issue is the impact that

recovery will have on the level of energy prices and whether the heightened volatility
we have seen in recent years will persist.

On the environmental front, a return to global economic growth will put upward
pressure on the output of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gasses as energy
consumption increases. A resumption of global growth will therefore tend to raise
emissions, moving them in the opposite direction to the big emissions cuts that will
ultimately be necessary to stabilise the global climate. Over the course of the next
decade, however, we will need to start to reverse this trend of rising emissions without
jeopardising the growth of the global economy and the development aspirations of
poorer nations around the world.

2

These challenges will need to be addressed in the context of the highly integrated
global economy which has developed over the last two decades, embracing China,
India and many other emerging market economies. The characteristics of this “new
global economy” have shaped the recent recession and will have an important bearing
on the energy and environmental challenges we are likely to face over the coming
recovery.

The “new global economy”

Economists have been talking about the process of globalisation for many decades.
Over the last fifty years, flows of international trade and investment have grown
steadily in importance in relation to the size of national economies. For example, in
the UK, total trade flows – exports plus imports – have risen from about a third of
GDP in the mid-1960s to over 60% last year.1 Over the same period, the growth of
multinational businesses has led to increasing investment flows across borders.

But in the 1990s and 2000s, this process of globalisation has deepened and intensified
in two critical respects. First, the last two decades have seen the integration into the
global economy of many emerging market economies, including China, India, Russia
and much of Eastern Europe. Second, the deregulation and liberalisation of financial
markets in many countries from the 1980s onwards has created much more globally
integrated capital and financial markets, with financial institutions – especially banks
– operating on a much more international basis. This deepening of the process of
globalisation has given an added boost to the growth of world trade and economic
activity. It has also extended the globalisation of markets outside the sphere of trade
and into the markets for labour and for capital and finance.2

The recession and the period of growth which preceded it has shown this “new global
economy” in action and two features of its behaviour have struck me particularly
forcefully in my role as a member of the Monetary Policy Committee. The first is the
1

In the years 1963-67, total UK exports plus imports averaged 33.2% of GDP at market prices. By
2008, this figure had risen to 60.9%. This trade ratio had risen to over 40% in the late 1970s and to
around 50% by the mid-1990s.
2
See Spange and Young (2007) for a detailed discussion of the macroeconomic impacts of
globalisation. Sentance (2009) also discusses the role of globalisation in shaping recent macroeconomic
developments.

3

high degree of interdependence across economies around the globe, which reflects not
only traditional trade and investment linkages but also a highly integrated global
financial system. We have seen these global interdepencies operating in a dramatic
way over the course of the recent recession. At the heart of the recession is a global
financial crisis triggered by bad lending in the US mortgage market. But these
financial problems have had a much more significant and widespread impact because
they have been transmitted to banks around the world through a highly complex and
integrated global financial system. 3

Last autumn and earlier this year, we have seen another aspect of this high degree of
international interdependence at work. The negative shock to business and consumer
confidence associated with last autumn’s financial turmoil has been transmitted
around the world and across sectors by the highly integrated global supply chains
which now exist in the production and distribution of manufactured goods, stretching
from the US and Europe to Asia and back again. The initial downturn in demand also
triggered a global stock cycle which has amplified the cutbacks in production in many
key sectors of manufacturing, such as the motor industry.

Chart 1: World manufacturing activity
Purchasing managers’ indices, seasonally adjusted
60
55
50
45

UK
China

40

Euro Area
35

Japan
US

30
25

Jan-08

Jul-08

Jan-09

Jul-09

Note: Index number over 50 indicates expansion; below 50 indicates contraction
Source: Thomson Datastream, CLSA

3

See Hume and Sentance (2009) for a more detailed discussion of the global credit boom from the
mid-90s to mid-2000s and its macroeconomic causes and consequences.

4

Chart 1 shows this very clearly. Indicators of manufacturing activity have moved
very similarly across economies during the current recession, across all the major
regions of the world economy. In all economies, the sharpest declines in output were
seen around the turn of the year, since when the downturn has eased. The most recent
surveys indicate either a stabilisation in output or a return to growth. But in the last
quarter of 2008 and the first quarter of 2009 almost every major economy in the world
experienced sharp falls in GDP driven by falling trade and manufacturing activity.4
This synchronisation in the economic cycle has been much more pronounced in this
recession than in previous global downturns in the mid-1970s, early 1980s and early
1990s.

A second key feature of the new global economy, which flows from this high degree
of interdependence, is how it has changed the way growth and inflation respond to
relatively strong demand in national economies.

In the 1990s and 2000s, the

relatively plentiful supply of low-cost manufactured goods from China and other
emerging markets dampened the inflationary response we might otherwise have seen
from the strong growth of demand in the United States and some other economies.
Economies experiencing buoyant demand conditions, supported by the global credit
boom, were more likely to see this reflected in a deteriorating external balance rather
than strong domestic growth accompanied by inflationary pressures.

4

China and Australia were notable exceptions, though both of these economies experienced sharp
slowdowns. All the G7 economies experienced sharp falls in output in Q4 2008 and Q1 2009.

5

Chart 2: World Economic Growth, 1960-2008
Real GDP, year on year percentage change
12
World

OECD
10

Non-OECD

8
6
4

\

2
0
-2
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Note: GDP measured at market exchange rates
Source: IMF, OECD, Bank calculations

This changing response of the pattern of global growth to rising demand can be seen
clearly in Chart 2. The financial excesses in the United States and some other
countries were not reflected in particularly strong GDP growth in the US or other
advanced economies. Rather, strong growth was experienced in the emerging and
developing economies. As the chart shows, this created a divergence in growth
between the advanced economies and the non-OECD world which was unprecedented
in post-war economic history.

This strong growth in developing countries and

emerging markets did not simply reflect the dynamism of Asia, but a strong
performance from economies in the Middle East, Africa, Latin America and Eastern
Europe as well.5 Upward pressure on the price of energy and commodities in the mid2000s created a positive feedback loop from strong global growth which benefited
countries and regions which were major producers of these primary products.

5

See Sentance (2008) for a more detailed discussion

6

Chart 3: Selected current account imbalances
US $ billion
1997

2002

800

2008

600
400
200
0
-200
-400
-600

hi
na
il
ex
po
rte
rs

C

O

an
y
er
m

G

Ja
pa
n

us
tr
al
ia
Ea
Eu
st
ro
A
ar
si
ea
a
(e
x
C
hi
na
)

A

do
m
in
g

K

Sp
ai
n
ni
te
d
U

U

ni
te
d

S

ta
te
s

-800

Note: ‘Oil exporters’ include OPEC countries, Russia and Norway; ‘East Asia ex China’ includes
Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Korea, Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand
Source: IMF April 2009 WEO

One consequence of this pattern of growth was the emergence of global imbalances.
As Chart 3 shows, the United States in particular experienced a significant
deterioration in its current account position – reflecting its position at the epicentre of
the global credit boom. To a much lesser extent, there was a shift into deficit in other
advanced economies. The counterpart of these deficits was the emergence of large
surpluses in China and for oil producers.6

Another consequence of these growth spillovers in the “new global economy” of the
1990s and 2000s was to dampen the response of monetary policy to the growth of
credit and domestic demand. Strong demand in the United States and some other
economies over this period generated strong output growth overseas rather than at
home. The normal channels through which demand generates inflationary pressure –
as a result of higher activity putting pressure on capacity and labour costs – were not

6

See Astley, Giese, Hume and Kubelec (2009) for a recent discussion of the evolution of global
imbalances and their relationship to the current financial crisis

7

operating in the way in which they might have done in the past. Instead of boosting
growth and inflation domestically, these demand pressures spilled over into stronger
global growth by boosting output in emerging markets and developing economies.

It might be argued that the non-OECD economies which were benefiting from strong
global demand conditions might have compensated by tightening their policies. But
many of these countries had other macroeconomic objectives – including boosting
growth and maintaining exchange rate stability. So it is not perhaps surprising that
such a response was not forthcoming.

Chart 4: Oil and commodity prices
Exchange traded commodities, index 1 Jan 2000 = 100
1000
900
800
700
600
Baltic Exchange Dry Index

500
400

Oil prices

300
200
100

Food prices

0
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Note: Oil price is Brent forward price for delivery in 10-21 days time
Source: Thomson Datastream

What we did see, however, in the mid-2000s was strong upward pressure on oil, other
energy prices and commodities more generally, as Chart 4 shows.7 Not only was the
general direction of these prices upwards – until the second half of last year – but
there was also exceptional price volatility. The upward price pressure has abated
significantly since the middle of last year, when the oil price reached a peak of nearly
$150/barrel. But energy and commodity markets have remained relatively volatile.

7

The Baltic Exchange Dry Index shown in Chart 4 is a measure of bulk shipping costs which has
closely reflected pressures in commodity markets in recent years.

8

Chart 5: UK consumer price inflation, 1997-2009
Percentage change on a year earlier
6
CPI
CPI excluding food and energy

5
4
3
2
1
0

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

Source: Office for National Statistics

This global price volatility led to fluctuations in inflation in the UK and other major
economies. As Chart 5 shows, without the impact of food and energy prices, which
are heavily influenced by global price developments, UK CPI inflation would have
stayed very close to the two percent target in the last few years. But the result of food
and energy price movements has been to send UK inflation on a giant rollercoaster –
up to over 5 per cent about a year ago, and back down below the target more recently
as petrol and domestic energy prices have dropped back from their peaks last year.

To sum up, therefore, the task of managing inflation has become more challenging for
national monetary authorities in the new global economy of the 21st century. The
close correspondence which used to link domestic demand conditions, national
economic growth and inflation has been weakened through the increased propensity
of demand to spill-over and support growth elsewhere in the global economy. At the
same time, we have seen heightened volatility in both growth and inflation at the
national level driven by global developments. Later on, I want to come back to the
question of whether this is the new normality. But, first, I would like to discuss some

9

energy and environmental challenges posed by the new global economy we now
inhabit.

10

Energy prices

On the energy front, a key issue is what might happen to both the level and the
volatility of energy prices once the recovery gets into its stride. Chart 6 shows the
level of the real oil price over the last two decades alongside the IMF’s measure of the
“global output gap” – the level of global GDP relative to underlying capacity. This
measure suggests that in 2007 and 2008, world output was significantly above
capacity but that position has been rapidly reversed as the global economy moved into
recession in the second half of last year.

Chart 6: Real oil price and global output gap
US $
100
90

Percent

8

Global output gap (RHS)
Real oil price (LHS)

6

80
70

4

60

2

50
40

0

30
20

-2

10

-4

0

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Note: 2009 is an average of daily data to 9th Sept 2009; Oil Prices are deflated by US consumption deflator
Source: IMF, Thomson Datastream, August Consensus forecast and Bank calculations

In the 1990s and very early years of this decade, fluctuations in global capacity
appeared to be associated with a real oil price in the range of $15-30/barrel, once we
adjust for inflation. But that relationship appears to shift as we move into the mid2000s. It is very striking that even with the high degree of spare capacity in the global
economy at present, the oil price is trading at around $70/barrel. Other energy prices
– including gas, coal and electricity prices – are also remarkably firm given the state
of the global economic cycle.

What might account for this upward shift in the real oil price and real energy prices
more generally? When oil prices surged in the first half of last year, there was much

11

discussion about the role of speculative activity in driving the oil market and other
commodity prices. Financial markets can certainly play a part in driving short-term
price developments. But the upward movement in the relationship between the oil
price and global spare capacity shown in Chart 6 looks to have persisted since the
mid-2000s and is more likely to reflect market fundamentals – ie the balance between
supply and demand.8

Chart 7: World GDP growth and energy consumption
Average annual growth rates, percent
5

GDP
Energy consum ption

4

3

2

1

0
70s

80s

90s

2000-08

Note: Oil consumption is measured in million tonnes; other fuels in million tonnes of oil equivalent
Source: World Bank and BP Statistical Review

Strong demand has clearly played a part. If we look back at the growth of energy
consumption over the course of this decade so far, we have seen the strongest growth
in energy consumption since the 1970s, as Chart 7 shows.

Growth in energy

consumption has also been strong relative to world GDP growth – at least when
measured at market exchange rates as shown on this chart. In other words, the energy
intensity of economic growth has increased relative to previous decades.9

8

Saporta, Trott and Tudela (2009) analyse recent oil price movements in detail and conclude that
supply and demand factors have been the main driving force, though an asset price bubble cannot be
ruled out as a driver of price movements in 2008.
9
This shift would appear less pronounced if world GDP was measured at PPP exchange rates (which
is the measure shown in Chart 2), as a PPP-weighted measure gives more weight to the strong growth
in the non-OECD economies. However, even on a PPP weighted basis, the pick up in energy
consumption growth relative to the 1980s and 1990s is much stronger than the acceleration in GDP
growth.

12

This has happened despite significant rises in the cost of energy since the very early
years of this decade. But we should recognise that prices will affect energy demand
with a significant lag, as the fuel efficiency of production and consumption is heavily
dependent on investment in new equipment. Indeed, Chart 7 suggests that the energy
price hikes in the 1970s dampened energy consumption relative to economic growth
in the following two decades. So we may see more impact of the current regime of
high energy prices on demand in the 2010s and 2020s.

Chart 8: World primary energy use
Millions of tonnes oil equivalent
7000
OECD
Non OECD

6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Note: Oil consumption is measured in million tonnes; other fuels in million tonnes of oil equivalent
Source: BP Statistical Review

One factor which has been contributing to this rapid growth of energy consumption
has been the growth of energy demand in developing and emerging market
economies. As Chart 8 shows, the arrival of the “new global economy” which I have
described earlier in this speech has been accompanied by a very substantial uplift in
energy consumption outside the OECD economies. Energy consumption outside the
OECD rose by nearly 50% in the eight years 2000 to 2008. As a result, emerging
market and developing economy consumption of energy now exceeds consumption in
the advanced OECD economies. This is a sign of the shifting balance of economic
power across the global economy.

This shift towards stronger energy demand from the non-OECD economies seems
unlikely to be reversed. Indeed, it is likely to be reinforced by the pattern of recovery

13

that appears to be emerging in the global economy. As Chart 9 shows, forecasts for
growth next year show Asia leading the way in terms of global recovery prospects.
This view has been reinforced by evidence that Asian economies and some other
emerging market economies – such as Brazil – have turned around more quickly than
the economies of Europe and North America which have been more directly affected
by the financial crisis.

Chart 9: Asia leads the global recovery
2010 forecast for real GDP growth, percent

re
a
A

U
K
Eu
ro

n
Ja
pa

U
S

K
or
ea
S

ga
po
re

Si
n

an
)
Ja
p

A

si

a

(e
xc

In
di
a

C
hi
na

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Source: August 2010 Consensus forecast

There is clearly a question whether this turnaround in Asian growth can be selfsustaining. In the short-term, policy stimulus from monetary and fiscal measures has
played an important part in supporting demand in key Asian economies such as China
and India. However, growth should also be supported in Asia by the fact that financial
systems, personal and corporate balance sheets and public finances have all been
much less significantly affected by the crisis than in North America and Europe.
Coupled with strong supply-side fundamentals, that makes me optimistic that growth
in Asia can be sustained and become a major engine for world recovery in the years
ahead.

This implies that energy demand – particularly from the non-OECD area – is likely to
pick up again as the world moves into a recovery phase. The implication for global
energy prices would then hinge on two other factors. First, will global energy supply
respond strongly enough to dampen price pressure?
14

And, second, will global

environmental concerns create a strong enough countervailing influence on energy
demand?

On the supply side, I am sure there will be a number of positive responses to a
prolonged period of high energy prices. More marginal oil fields and other higher
cost sources of energy will be developed, including renewable energy.

But the

investment cycle will take a while to come on stream. And, as recent statements from
oil industry sources have suggested, there are many political obstacles and risks
associated with the development of new energy sources. The last time we saw a shift
towards higher energy prices in the mid-1970s, the higher price regime persisted for
about a decade while the supply and demand responses were taking place. A similar
timescale would point to a period of high energy prices lasting at least until the
middle of the next decade.

Global environmental challenges

Could moves to tackle global climate change have a limiting impact on the upward
energy price pressure from global economic growth? Chart 10 shows the strong
growth of energy consumption across the world economy over this decade has also
been associated with strong growth of emissions. Indeed, emissions from energy
sources have risen faster than energy consumption itself, reflecting a shift to higher
carbon fuels such as coal which are used widely in emerging market economies
including China.

15

Chart 10: World GDP growth and CO2 emissions from energy
Average annual growth rates, percent
GDP

5

Carbon Dioxide
Em issions

4

3

2

1

0
70s

80s

90s

2000-08

Source: World Bank and BP Statistical Review

From an environmental standpoint, Chart 10 is very worrying. Rather than breaking
the link between world economic growth and greenhouse gas emissions, at the global
level they appear to be becoming more closely correlated. This reflects the absence of
a strong political framework to drive the changes which will be necessary to set the
major economies of the world on a reduced emissions path. This partly reflects the
inadequate coverage of the Kyoto protocol. As we have seen, the rapid energy
consumption over the last decade has come from the developing and emerging market
economies which did not make substantial commitments at Kyoto. It also reflects the
slow progress in developing the policy instruments and policies which will drive the
shift to the “low carbon economy” – including carbon pricing, emissions trading and
technology policies. Addressing both of these issues is critical to the success of any
future international agreement on climate change, and the policies which will flow
from it.

For the benefit of our children, their children and future generations, it is to be hoped
that genuine progress will be made at the Copenhagen summit at the end of this year.
But, allowing for the inevitable lags in agreeing and implementing policies, and the
time period it takes to affect investment and technological development in the energy
and transport industries which are responsible for the bulk of global emissions, this is
unlikely to affect energy demand over the early phases of the global recovery which is
now emerging.
16

Chart 11: Sustainable global emissions scenarios
Annual greenhouse gas emissions, (GtCO2e)
70
60
50
40
30
2016:4%

20

Increased early grow th

2000

2010

2020

10

Year

2030

2040

0
2050

Note: 2016:4 trajectory with global emissions peaking in 2016 with subsequent reduction in total
emissions of 4%
Source: Committee on Climate Change (2008)

The projections made by the UK Committee on Climate Change show this very
clearly. As Chart 11 shows, the Committee’s scenarios envisage a peak in global
emissions around 2016, followed by significant reductions thereafter.

The main

variant which the Committee considered in its 2008 report was one in which
emissions (and hence energy demand) grew more strongly, not less so, in the period to
2016.

Over time, I believe that the world community will address the global environmental
challenges facing it, and the political moves in the last year or two have been
consistent with that direction of travel. But the impact of these policies on energy
demand and supply will probably not be felt until at least the second half of the next
decade.

Conclusions and policy implications

What are the key conclusions and policy implications which flow from this analysis?
First of all, let me summarise the picture I have painted in this speech. The “new
global economy” – which has come into being in the closing years of the 20th century

17

and the opening years of this century – poses some key challenges for national
economic policymakers.

First, global interdependencies mean we are more

vulnerable to global shocks of various kinds. We have witnessed this in a very
dramatic way in the recent recession. Second, global spillovers have changed the
growth and inflation dynamics of national economies. The links between domestic
demand, growth and inflation at the national level have weakened and the potential
for global volatility to influence the inflation path of economies has increased.

On the energy front, I can see substantial upside risks to prices over the coming
recovery as demand picks up across the global economy and Asia plays a leading role
in the growth of the world economy. Against the background of supply constraints,
this creates the potential for continuing price volatility. I do not see supply
developments and environmental policy moves changing the energy price
environment which became established in the mid-2000s until much later in the next
decade.

In conclusion, I would like to make four broad policy-related comments. First,
though I have described a many ways in which the globalisation of the world
economy has increased volatility and made national economies more difficult to
manage, the solution is not to row back on globalisation. There are clearly aspects of
the global economy which need to be better regulated, including the financial sector.
But the experience of the dynamic Asian economies has taught us that participation in
an open world trading economy offers poorer countries their best chance to raise
living standards, improve health and life expectancy, and achieve a better quality of
life. As the major economies discovered in the 1930s, a retreat into protectionism is
not the right response to increasing global interdependence. And in general it seems
to me that policy-makers have resisted the pressure to resort to overt protectionism as
a response to the current financial crisis and global recession.

By contrast, in an increasingly integrated world economy, there is an increased need
for effective international policy co-ordination across a range of policy areas –
including energy and environmental issues – which is the second policy observation I
would make. However, achieving policy co-ordination and making it effective is
extraordinarily difficult. One factor that can help is to have effective institutions, and
18

on the economic front there is clearly an important agenda of reform of institutions
which were put in place to respond to a post-war economic situation and need to adapt
to the requirements of the 21st century economy. It is also to be hoped that the
international agreement on global environmental issues which is due to be concluded
later this year will have a strong programme of institutional development to underpin
it. As we have seen recently, international policy co-ordination can be achieved on an
“ad hoc” basis in a crisis situation when interests are well aligned. But over the
longer haul it needs a stronger institutional underpinning .

Third, at the national level, we need to recognise that the global economy is an
important source of volatility for economic growth and inflation going forward.
Indeed, that has been the experience of the MPC which has sought to operate UK
monetary policy against the backdrop of the “new global economy” I have described
in this speech. For me, recent events have provided a cautionary warning about what
monetary policy can and cannot achieve. We cannot isolate the UK economy from
major global economic shocks or from global price volatility affecting energy and
other commodity prices. What we can do is to ensure that policy interventions are in
a stabilising direction and are consistent with the medium term objective of economic
growth underpinned by low inflation, which is what I have sought to do as a member
of the MPC.

Finally, we should be careful about expecting a return to the apparent “great stability”
which characterised the period of the mid-90s to the mid-2000s. This period was
shaped by the circumstances of the global economy over that period, as well as by a
significant improvement in policy frameworks in many countries in the UK. Recent
experience has reminded us that the new global economy of the 21st century is also a
potentially volatile place. If stability does return, as I hope it does in the coming
recovery, we need to be looking very carefully to see where the next big global shock
might be coming from. And the energy market is one of the prime candidates we
need to keep an eye on.

19

References

Astley, M, Giese, J, Hume, M and Kubelec, C (2009), “Global imbalances and the
financial crisis” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol 49, No 3, pp 178-190
Committee on Climate Change (2008), “Building a low-carbon economy – the UK’s
contribution to tackling climate change”, December 2008.
Hume, M and Sentance, A (2009), “The global credit boom: challenges for
macroeconomics and policy”, Bank of England Monetary Policy Unit Discussion
Paper no. 27, June 2009
Saporta, V, Trott, ,. and Tuedela, M (2009), “What can be said about the rise and fall
in oil prices” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol 49, No 3, pp 215-225
Sentance, A. (2008), “Global inflation: how big a threat?” Bank of England Quarterly
Bulletin, Vol 48, no 3, pp 339-346
Sentance, A. (2009) “Monetary Policy in Turbulent Times” Speech at the Agricultural
Engineers’ Association Annual Conference, London 21 April 2009
Spange, M and Young, C. (2007), “The macroeconomic impact of globalisation,
theory and evidence” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol 47, No 1, pp 40-47

20

