Equity Indices and Europe
Speech given by
David Clementi

At the FTSE European Shareholder Dinner, Claridges, London
17 June 1999

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

The inauguration of these awards is an eloquent symbol of how internationalised equity markets are
becoming. This has of course always been true for really large companies, many of which have for long
generated their profits in a range of different economies. But as barriers to doing business cross border
come down - not just in Europe, though that is the most obvious example - I think it will become increasingly
common to view a whole range of companies as part of transnational sectors, in Europe and beyond. And of
course, FTSE International has an important role to play in all of this.

I would like to say something tonight about the growing significance of equity indices, both generically, and
specifically in the European context. But perhaps I could begin by setting out, by way of background, the
reasons why we at the Bank are interested in developments in equity markets.

The Bank of England has three overall policy objectives - or Core Purposes, as we term them - and
developments in equity markets actually impinge on all three.

The Bank's first core purpose is the pursuit of monetary stability. Every month the nine members of the
Monetary Policy Committee look closely at equity market developments and particularly at the level of the
indices in the main markets. This is because, through confidence and wealth effects, changes in equity
values affect consumption, and similarly, changes in equity markets imply changes in the cost of capital or
investment opportunities and thus are an influence on investment behaviour. Additionally, equity markets
may be able to provide useful information - ahead of the availability of official statistics - on the state of
particular sectors of the economy.

The Bank's second core purpose is the pursuit of the overall stability of the financial system as a whole. This
work has a number of different aspects - promoting structures and policies which enhance the robustness of
the financial system; analysing prevailing financial stability conditions; and, in rare circumstances, crisis
management work (which we carry out in conjunction with the Treasury and the FSA, as set out in the
Memorandum of Understanding between us).

Finally, the Bank's third core purpose is to promote the competitiveness and efficiency of the UK's financial
services, and that obviously includes the UK-based equity markets. In this area the Bank's role is very much
one of raising issues and encouraging, and occasionally co-ordinating, the work of others, but not that of
enforcing particular strategies or institutional changes. For instance, following the MMC investigation of subunderwriting in equity markets, we are currently putting together a guide to good practice in that area.

So these three core purposes explain the Bank's range of interests in equity markets generally. In turning
now to some of the issues raised specifically by equity indices, I would like to touch on two related issues.
The first is the use of indices in benchmarking and more specifically the growth of overt tracker funds. The
second is the role of indices, and the companies who publish them, in a competitive market place, especially
within Europe.
2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2

There can be little doubt as to the significance of the use of stock indices as performance benchmarks - by
both fund managers, and trustees. A substantial proportion of UK fund managers probably use one of the
FTSE indices as a benchmark. In terms of direct asset allocation, it is now estimated that somewhere
between 15 per cent and 20 percent of institutional UK equity assets are managed so as overtly to track one
index or another. This is less than in the US - where the figure is reckoned to be around 35 per cent - but it is
still a substantial amount of money, around £100 billion. Of these UK index tracking funds, a majority
probably track the FTSE All-Share. But newer funds are increasingly tracking the FTSE-100, and indeed
there are a whole range of stock indices which can be, and are, tracked.

We are obviously interested in the factors which are driving this shift towards index trading. One facilitating
factor is technical - the increasing availability of relatively cheap but sophisticated IT systems means tracking
funds can be run at comparatively low management cost. Another factor is that, as financial markets
everywhere have become more actively researched and traded, some investors feel that markets have
grown closer to the textbook efficient markets paradigm; and even if such investors do not know about
perfect market and random walk theory, they know that it's tough to beat the index. On one estimate only a
third of actively managed funds outperformed the FTSE All-Share last year, although I think such figures
need to be treated with a great deal of caution; detailed analysis of returns over a very long period of time
would be needed to draw any firm conclusions about relative performance.

Of course some commentators have raised concerns as to whether the rapid growth of passive index
tracking funds has had a disturbing effect on equity markets. It has been argued that the presence of fewer
active funds means that less research has been undertaken into individual stocks, and so individual stocks
may be priced less efficiently as a result. Another argument is that the cost of capital for smaller companies
outside the major indices may be adversely affected to the extent that they are cut off from access to tracker
funds.

These are debates which the Bank will continue to follow with interest, although I think there is little hard
evidence to date of any such "macro" distortions. If there were significant pricing anomalies, I am inclined to
think that the active fund managers would eventually exploit them. There may indeed be some element of
natural adjustment here between passive and active managers. My own view is that the more immediate
issues raised by index tracking funds are more "micro" in nature, relating to issues such as the design of
particular indices - for instance making sure the rules governing the composition of indices do not increase
artificially the volatility of stocks entering and leaving the index.

Against this background of looking at design features I very much welcome FTSE International's current
consultation paper. It raises a number of extremely important issues on which it is proper that there should
be market consultation and a full debate.

3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

3

The consultation paper makes clear that among the principles underlying the composition of indices should
be those of transparency and predictability. I welcome this; these are important principles in terms of
underpinning confidence in indices. Over the last couple of years those of us from the official sector have
often proclaimed, in speeches such as this, the importance of transparency, so it is good to see an echo of
this from the private sector.

The consultation paper covers the difficult issues of the size of free float, cross holdings and the issue of
nationality. On the last issue, the paper proposes moving from a fairly specific rule as regards nationality to a
more general one, which introduces a degree of discretion. This is one area where I hope and expect there
will be a good deal of feedback from the market, since it is important that any new rules on nationality are
consistent with the principles of predictability and transparency.

I have concentrated on transparency in the rules; but this carries over to governance issues as well. How the
rules governing indices are devised and implemented clearly affects market behaviour. And this makes it
important that there should be openness about process - about how committees are appointed; who serves
on them; and how they reach their decisions.

So far I have focused mainly on indices as part of the investment process. But indices providers are of
course also businesses in their own right, and indeed this is becoming an increasingly competitive sector. In
European markets, for instance, as well as FTSE International, investors can choose from a variety of
different indices providers. And of course only this week there has been a good deal of coverage of FTSE
new "Stars" index. Competition between indices may become quite fierce, although I think it unlikely that a
single dominant benchmark will emerge for some time. Fund managers, trustees and others may well want
different indices for different purposes: some will prefer a narrow index, some a broad one; some will want a
Euro area index only, whereas others will want a pan-European index, etc. So consultation about market
needs is important in this context as well.

These competitive questions are also of course to some extent tied in with broader questions about the
future development of Europe's equity markets; in particular as to how far and how quickly Europe moves
towards having a single pan-European equity market, at least for its larger stocks.

Chairman I hope very much, indeed I am confident, that FTSE International will remain in the forefront of
these changes. I hope there is a significant response to their consultative paper and I look forward to seeing
the results of that process. But for now it remains only for me to thank you again for an excellent dinner and
to congratulate the winners of the awards to be presented tonight.

4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

4

