Financial Frictions and the Monetary Transmission
Mechanism: Theory, Evidence and Policy Implications
Speech given by
Charles Bean, Chief Economist and Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of
England

Jens Larsen, Monetary Assessment and Strategy Division, Bank of England

Kalin Nikolov, Monetary Assessment and Strategy Division, Bank of England

At the Monetary Transmission Network conference, European Central Bank, Frankfurt
18 December 2001

We are grateful to Peter Andrews, David England, Simon Hall, Anil Kashyap, Vincent Labhard, Lavan
Mahadeva, Steven Millard, Katharine Neiss, Laura Piscitelli, James Proudman, Rachel Reeves,
Gabriel Sterne, and Peter Westaway for comments on previous versions of this paper, and to Kosuke
Aoki, Luca Benati and Jan Vlieghe in particular for help with the estimation and simulation work. We
thank Anna-Maria Agresti, Benoit Mojon, Gert Peersman and Frank Smets for letting us use their
results. Thanks are also due to Ed Dew and Richard Geare for research assistance. The views
expressed are those of the authors and do not reflect the views of either the Bank of England or the
Monetary Policy Committee.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Abstract
This paper provides a brief survey of the role of financial frictions in the monetary
transmission mechanism. After noting some of the key stylised facts that any model of
the transmission mechanism must be consistent with, we discuss both the classical
interest rate channel and the credit and bank lending channels of monetary
transmission. We then review the empirical evidence relating to the relative
importance of these channels. Finally we consider what impact the presence of
significant financial frictions might have on the conduct of monetary policy.

2

1

Introduction

There is little doubt that central banks pay considerable attention to commercial banks
and financial intermediaries more generally. In a recent survey of 89 central banks
Fry, Julius, Mahadeva, Roger and Sterne (2000) found that ‘analysis of the banking
sector’ was ranked on average the seventh most important ingredient of the monetary
framework, above ‘analysis of the real sector’.1 Of course, this need not imply that
central banks consider that the behaviour of financial intermediaries constitutes a key
part of the monetary transmission mechanism, as they have objectives other than price
stability, specifically financial stability. Thus in the same survey, ‘analysis of
domestic financial stability’ was ranked fifth on average, indicating a concern for
financial markets in their own right. But even for the 16 central banks that ranked an
inflation target as the single most important ingredient and for whom understanding
the transmission mechanism is presumably key, the categories concerning the banking
sector received high ranking.
Traditional textbook models that are routinely used in the analysis of monetary policy,
such as IS-LM, usually do not spell out the assumptions that underpin the
transmission mechanism. And in so far as they do, they pay little attention to financial
frictions. The New Keynesian framework set out in Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1999)
does describe the foundations more explicitly, yet in the basic framework, capital
markets are assumed to be free of frictions and complete. This seems at odds not just
with the survey evidence discussed above, but also with recent experiences, such as
the crises in East Asia and current developments in Argentina, where developments in
financial markets have clearly been important in determining the appropriate design
and conduct of monetary policy.
In this paper we discuss the impact and implications of frictions originating in
financial markets for the transmission of monetary policy. Drawing on the vast
literature on financial market frictions and the monetary transmission mechanism, we
address the following questions. What assumptions might underpin a framework
where financial market frictions play a role? Is the empirical evidence consistent with

3

the predictions of that framework? And how important quantitatively are the effects of
such frictions?
Our focus is primarily on the transmission mechanism in a developed economy that is
operating in ‘normal circumstances’. That is we avoid discussion of financial crises,
liquidity traps and similar issues that are not central to the focus of this conference.
But even with such a relatively narrow focus, a comprehensive survey of the literature
is well beyond the scope of this paper. Excellent surveys of this territory can be found
in Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (1999), Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1999) and
Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999).
We begin with a brief review of the ‘stylised facts’ that any representation of the
transmission mechanism needs to be compatible with. But these stylised facts, while
helpful in providing a broad characterisation of the transmission mechanism, are
typically not sufficient to distinguish the relative importance of different transmission
channels. Hence, in sections three and four, we move on to discuss first the theoretical
underpinnings and then the empirical evidence relating to the transmission
mechanism. We then turn our attention to the question of why central bankers should
care about all this. For if there is a stable empirical relationship between the policy
instrument and the target variable(s), why should (s)he be concerned with the
underlying structure of the economy in general, and of financial market frictions in
particular? Our answer is that the presence of such frictions is likely to create extra
uncertainty about the impact of interest rate changes on activity and thence on
inflation. With the aid of a simple model, and invoking recent thinking on policy
design under uncertainty, we show how policy should be modified to take account of
uncertainty engendered by the presence of financial market frictions.

2

Some stylised facts

To set the scene, we begin by recording some of the empirical regularities that any
model of the transmission mechanism should be consistent with. We first provide a
1

There are 21 components in this survey. The components deemed more important are independence
of central bank, maintenance of inflation expectations, transparency of policy, inflation targets, analysis
of domestic financial stability and exchange rate targets.

4

brief discussion of the key stylised facts for the euro area, the United Kingdom and
the United States. Taking the study by Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (1999) as
our reference point, we then selectively summarise the main conclusions of the
literature employing Vector Autoregression (VAR) techniques to characterise the
response of the economy to a monetary shock.2
Table 1 reports the cross-correlations between the main macroeconomic variables in
the three economies. The results for the United States and the euro area are taken
directly from Agresti and Mojon (2001), who use the Baxter and King (1999) bandpass filtering procedure. In deriving comparable statistics for the United Kingdom, we
have used a frequency domain filter to avoid losing observations at the beginning and
at the end of the sample. To economise on space, we do not provide a comprehensive
discussion of the sensitivity of our results to differences in choice of filter, sample and
data, but for our purposes, the differences between the filters are likely to be
negligible. Benati (2001) provides a thorough discussion of the appropriateness of
band-pass filtering for establishing stylised facts. We note in passing that our results
are similar to those in Blackburn and Ravn (1992) who use a different filtering
technique over a different sample.
At a general level, the resulting key features are not dissimilar: consumption is less
volatile than investment; investment is about twice as volatile as output; and both
consumption and investment are highly pro-cyclical. In contrast to the euro area and
the United States, consumption in the United Kingdom is more volatile than output.
Also, price levels are counter-cyclical while inflation is somewhat pro-cyclical,
whether measured by the GDP deflator or by consumer price indices. Some
similarities in financial variables are apparent too: short-term interest rates are
positively correlated with GDP at short leads and lags, with higher correlations at
short lags. Also, short-term interest rates are more volatile than long rates in all three
areas. The yield curve measure, which is simply the difference between the long and
the short interest rate, is closely correlated with GDP, but appears to be lagging rather
than leading the cycle.
2

There is a large literature that discusses differences in the monetary propagation mechanism within
current and prospective members of the euro area. We do not pursue that issue here. Mojon and
Peersman (this volume) is a recent contribution to this literature.

5

But there are also some notable differences. Short-term nominal interest rates in the
United Kingdom are more volatile than in the euro area and the United States, but this
is not too surprising given the changing nature of United Kingdom monetary policy
arrangements over the sample. Equity prices in the United Kingdom and the euro area
are significantly more volatile than in the United States and seem to lead GDP more
strongly in the United States and the United Kingdom. The latter property is perhaps
related to the greater extent of direct share ownership in the Anglo-Saxon countries.
Real estate prices in the United Kingdom – at least by our measure – are much more
volatile in both an absolute and a relative sense than in the euro area and the United
States. Our measure of narrow money for the United Kingdom, M0, is clearly a
coincident indicator, with a much higher contemporaneous correlation with GDP than
M1 has for the euro area or the United States. And, as in the euro area, narrow money
appears to be a leading indicator of activity in the US. Broad measures of money
generally appear to have weaker indicator properties.
What can these unconditional moments of the data tell us about the nature of the
monetary transmission mechanism? Unfortunately the answer is not a lot. Any
characterisation of the transmission mechanism necessarily involves taking a stand
both on the structure of the economy and on how to identify the shocks that the
economy has been subject to. But one conclusion that can at least be drawn from these
correlations is that the dynamic behaviour of macroeconomic aggregates in these
countries is very broadly similar. This is in spite of the known structural differences in
credit, housing and goods markets, and in degrees of openness.
From this general characterisation of the three economies, we turn to the evidence on
the transmission mechanism provided by VARs. Most of the literature we cite here
achieves identification through some variation on the recursive identification scheme
employed by Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (1999). That paper provides a
comprehensive survey of the literature for the United States, and represents a
reasonable reflection of the ‘consensus’ view. Here we draw on the results in
Peersman and Smets (2001) for the euro area and the United States, and on analysis of
our own for the United Kingdom.

6

The recursive identification scheme divides the variables of interest into those that
appear contemporaneously in the policymaker’s information set, typically GDP, a
final goods price index and short-term interest rates, and those that appear only with a
lag. Under the recursive identification scheme, variables in the contemporaneous
block do not respond immediately to the policy shock, and policy obviously cannot
respond immediately to shocks to variables in the non-contemporaneous block.
Essentially then, the VAR is identified using the Choleski decomposition, with the
contemporaneous block ordered first, the policy equation second, and the noncontemporaneous block last. The key decision the econometrician faces is which set a
variable is assigned to, but the responses to a monetary policy shock will be invariant
to the chosen ordering within the blocks. The details of the identification schemes
vary across studies – and this can have important implications particularly for the
short-run responses.3
Here we report the baseline VAR estimated by Peersman and Smets (2001) for the
euro area and the United States. This VAR includes output, consumer prices and a
monetary aggregate in the contemporaneous block, and a real effective exchange rate
index in the non-contemporaneous block. For both areas, a commodity price index is
also included. The VAR for the euro area includes it as an exogenous variable, while
the VAR for the US includes in the non-contemporaneous block. The VAR for the
euro area also includes US short-term interest rates and output as exogenous
variables, to control for ‘world inflation’ and ‘world demand’. The VAR we report for
the United Kingdom is similar to the euro-area VAR, but differs in that we have
included a house price index in the endogenous block. We have used the GDP
deflator as our measure of prices and a nominal rather than a real effective exchange
rate index. Finally, we have used oil prices rather than commodity prices as an
exogenous variable.4

3

This identification scheme is useful, partly because it is so simple. This makes it an ideal tool for a
broad-brush cross-country comparison of the response to a monetary policy shock. Other, typically
more elaborate, identification schemes may provide a more exact characterisation of an economy’s
propagation mechanism, by imposing more structure on the VAR. See Leeper, Sims and Zha (1996)
and Kim and Roubini (2000) for prominent examples.
4
The scheme we use here is fairly similar to that used by Aoki, Proudman and Vlieghe (2001), but is
by no means the only plausible scheme. Alternative schemes can be found in Dhar, Pain and Thomas
(2000), Hall (2001), Millard and Wells (2001) and Millard (2000) who provide more comprehensive
discussion of the issues relating to estimating the response to monetary policy shocks in the UK data.

7

Chart 1 provides the impulse responses to a typical monetary shock for the euro area,
the United States and the United Kingdom in columns one to three. The results are
unsurprising. In all three regions, the VAR evidence suggests that a contractionary
monetary policy shock raises the short-term interest rate on impact, and the effect
persists over several quarters. A contractionary monetary policy shock also leads to
persistent and large falls in the price level, but the initial response is rather muted –
indeed, under some identification schemes, the price level initially increases slightly,
giving rise to what is labelled as the ‘price puzzle’. In all three areas, prices only start
to fall after some time, although on this evidence, the degree of sluggishness in prices
varies somewhat. In all regions, aggregate output falls after the shock, but the
response is prolonged and hump-shaped, with the peak effect occurring between four
and eight quarters. The peak effect in the euro area appears to be somewhat earlier
than in the United States and in the United Kingdom.
This exercise takes us a little further towards characterising the key empirical
characteristics of the monetary transmission mechanism than do the raw unconditional
moments, and further work could explore questions such as the stability of these
impulse responses over time. But even with a historically and statistically stable
empirical relationship, policy analysis without a theory of the transmission
mechanism is obviously incomplete. So it is this we turn to next.

3

Competing views of monetary transmission

3.1

The classical ‘interest rate’ channel

Under the classical view of the transmission channel, interest rates influence
economic activity by affecting various relative prices in the economy. These are
primarily the relative prices of capital and of future consumption in terms of current
consumption, and the relative price of domestic goods in terms of foreign goods. This
description of what constitutes the interest rate channel is fairly broad - it essentially
encompasses most mechanisms that are not associated with financial market frictions.
The key ingredients are as follows.

8

First, movements in the policy rate affect fixed investment through the user cost of
capital. Higher interest rates raise the required return from investment projects and
reduce the rate of business investment. Inventories are affected in much the same
way; higher interest rates increase the ‘user cost’ of holding inventories and lead firms
to economise on them.
Second, interest rates also represent the price of future relative to current
consumption. Higher interest rates cause households to substitute future for present
consumption. Interest rate movements also have an income effect on households.
Providing that households are net debtors, higher interest rates reduce the value of
lifetime income, further depressing consumption. Finally, by affecting the value of
financial assets such as stocks and bonds, in which household wealth is held, interest
rate movements can have a wealth effect on private sector spending.
Third, interest rate movements move the exchange rate thereby altering price
competitiveness and affecting net exports. Under sticky domestic prices and producer
currency pricing, the real exchange rate appreciation raises the relative price of
domestic in terms of foreign goods, and induces an ‘expenditure switching’ from
domestic to foreign goods. Under local currency pricing, exchange rate fluctuations
are absorbed in firms’ margins. This affects the value of firms’ equity and, via the
wealth effect, aggregate demand. There are also likely to be effects through supply
(see below).
Movements in the interest rate will also have an impact on the supply side of the
economy. A standard channel is through intertemporal substitution in labour supply.
In ‘limited participation’ models (Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans, 1997;
Christiano and Gust, 1998; Dhar and Millard, 2000), movements in real interest rates
generate supply effects through their effect on the cost of firms’ working capital. The
open economy introduces a further channel for short-term supply effects of monetary
policy. To the extent that domestic firms’ production depends on imported
intermediate goods, exchange rate movements will also have supply effects
(McCallum and Nelson, 2001). And when there is local currency pricing, persistent
movements in exchange rates may have a supply effect as exporting firms enter or
exit from the market.
9

But what features do we need for the interest rate channel to be economically
significant? The underlying mechanism implies a causal link from movements in
short nominal rates to movements in (short and long) real interest rates, which are
then transmitted to real variables and inflation. Then the quantitative importance of
the interest rate channel relies on the extent to which the central bank can control the
short-term real interest rate, and the extent to which movements in that short rate can
cause persistent movements in real variables.
The central bank’s control over the short-term real interest rate depends on a slow
responsiveness of inflation: without a slow response of inflation to a change in the
nominal policy rate, real rates will be unaffected. A slow responsiveness can come
from the presence of nominal rigidities (such as wage or price stickiness) combined
with substantial real rigidities, which blunt the impact of demand on firms’ costs. We
will return to this point below.
Limited participation models provide an alternative mechanism through which the
central bank can influence the short-term real interest rate. The crucial assumption in
these models is that some agents can adjust their portfolios continuously while others
must choose their money holdings in advance. Following an increase in the quantity
of money, the unconstrained agents have to be induced to increase their borrowing,
which can only happen if the real interest rate falls.
Provided that the central bank can affect real interest rates, the effect of monetary
policy will depend on the interest-rate sensitivity of demand and supply in the
economy. Consumer and investment spending will respond strongly to interest rates
when the intertemporal elasticity of substitution in consumption is high and there are
weak diminishing returns to capital. Also to the extent that durable/capital goods
expenditure depends on long, rather than, or in addition to, short rates, we need some
form of the expectations theory of the term structure to hold, so that short rate
movements are transmitted to long rates. Term premia may affect the extent to which
changes in short rates are translated into changes further along the yield curve: if term
premia respond systematically to offset movements in short rates, then this will tend
to weaken the effect of policy changes.
10

Finally, the net export channel only functions to the extent that the price of foreign
currency moves inversely with the domestic interest rate. This will ensure that a
contractionary monetary shock generates an exchange rate appreciation. Although this
link is standard in open conomy macroeconomic models, via uncovered interest
parity, in recent times it has sometimes proved to be a rather unreliable one.
Bernanke and Gertler (1995) identify three main puzzles for the conventional interest
rate channel view of the way aggregate demand responds to interest rate changes:
-

Composition. Why do brief movements in short-term interest rates affect spending
on durable goods (such as housing), which presumably should depend on the long
rate?5

-

Propagation. Why do real variables continue to adjust after most of the rise in
short rates has been reversed?

-

Amplification. How do interest rates lead to such pronounced movements in
output while ‘cost of capital’ measures appear insignificant in explaining
individual expenditure components?

We can add a number of other shortcomings to the interest rate transmission channel.
The uncovered interest parity condition is rejected by the data at business cycle
frequencies (Meese and Rogoff, 1983), implying that the net export channel of
monetary shock transmission (at least in its conventional form) is likely to be weak.
Also, there is strong evidence that there is imperfect pass-through from exchange
rates to final domestic prices – the evidence suggests that exchange rate variations, at
least to some extent and for some time, are absorbed in firms’ margins rather than
prices. Finally, Kocherlakota (2000) adds asymmetry as another facet of monetary
transmission that cannot be explained by the interest rate channel.
Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2001) show that an appropriately calibrated
model with only an interest rate channel can in fact reproduce the dynamic response
of the economy to a monetary policy shock. They find that a model that has sticky
5

This puzzle presumes that there are frictions in durable/capital goods markets: if there are perfect
second-hand markets and firms and individuals face no costs of adjusting their stock of
durables/capital, then the opportunity cost of holding the good is given by the short interest rate.

11

wages, variable capacity utilisation, and adjustment costs in investment and
consumption has both the amplification and propagation needed to match the data.
However, their model can match the dynamic response of investment to a monetary
shock only by assuming a very large elasticity of investment with respect to the long
rate. This is inconsistent with microeconomic evidence discussed below that shows a
very small interest sensitivity of investment. And since the volatility of investment
spending is a dominant feature of developed country business cycles, the inability of
the interest rate channel to reconcile aggregate data with microeconomic evidence is a
significant failure.
As a consequence, subsequent research has attempted to explain these puzzles by
appealing to frictions in financial markets, all of which rely on departures from the
Modigliani-Miller axioms so that finance is more than just a ‘veil’. The theoretical
literature has identified two main ways in which the financial system can act to
amplify and propagate the effect of monetary shocks: the ‘bank lending’ channel; and
the ‘broad credit channel’. The first applies to models that focus on the behaviour of
financial intermediaries in affecting the quantity of credit. The latter applies to models
that focus on the nature of the relationship between borrowers and lenders, and
consequently on the terms under which loans are supplied.
3.2

The bank lending channel

The bank lending channel attributes the effects of monetary policy to movements in
the supply of bank credit. The first generation of bank lending models motivated the
departures from the Modigliani-Miller axioms on the basis of asymmetric information
between borrowers and lenders about the characteristics of individual projects.
Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) assume that entrepreneurs have private information about
their projects, which have the same expected return but different probabilities of
success. Because of limited liability, borrowers can default on their loans in the event
that the project does not succeed. Hence, at high levels of interest rates, the only
entrepreneurs who would find borrowing attractive are high risk ones, with a low

12

probability of repayment. The resulting equilibrium is characterised by credit
rationing and underinvestment6.
However, subsequent research has shown that the Stiglitz and Weiss result is not
robust once sorting devices are allowed. The credit rationing result is an example of a
pooling equilibrium. Following Spence (1973), Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976) and
others, such equilibria can be eliminated by the use of a suitable sorting device, which
forces agents to reveal their types. Bester (1985) and others have shown that
collateral can be used as a sorting device, since ‘safe’ borrowers will be more willing
to undertake secured borrowing than ‘risky’ ones. The resulting separating
equilibrium involves no credit rationing.
More recent contributions focus on the imperfect substitutability between retail
deposits and wholesale deposits/debt on the liability side of the banks’ balance sheets.
In Bernanke and Blinder (1988) a number of borrowers are bank-dependent in the
sense that their only providers of outside finance are banks. This assumption can be
rationalised on the grounds that there are fixed costs of direct financial market
participation, and certain borrowers (i.e. small firms) will find those uneconomical.
Furthermore, Bernanke and Blinder assume that banks themselves suffer from
information problems in the market for equity and corporate debt, which implies that
they cannot raise outside capital to replace lost retail deposits. This imperfect
substitution between retail and wholesale deposits (debt) means that a fall in retail
deposits induced by a monetary contraction tends to be followed by a decline in loans
rather than an increase in the wholesale deposits. Bernanke and Blinder show that
such structures tend to amplify the effects of monetary policy shocks.
A new strand of the literature has attempted to provide fresh microfoundations for the
bank lending channel. Van den Heuvel (2001) examines bank behaviour in the
presence of a ‘capital-adequacy ratio’ and a constraint on new equity issues. He shows
that banks which face these two constraints will react differently to shocks compared
to the case when they can readily issue new equity to ensure that they always satisfy
6

DeMeza and Webb (1987) consider a different form of uncertainty about entrepreneurs’ projects that
leads to overinvestment in equilibrium. They assume that each project receives the same return R if

13

the capital-adequacy ratio. The paper demonstrates using numerical simulations that
following a shock to their equity, banks will contract potentially profitable lending if
they get sufficiently close to the capital-adequacy ratio. And since banks hold shortterm liabilities and long-term assets, monetary policy shocks will act as shocks to
bank equity. Furthermore, this ‘bank capital channel’ can work in a highly non-linear
fashion, implying significant potential for asymmetries in monetary transmission.
The essential feature of the bank lending channel is thus that the central bank can
affect the supply of credit by financial intermediaries by altering the quantity of base
money, thus raising the cost of capital to bank-dependent borrowers. This effect is
additional to that induced by the change in the official interest rate operating via the
interest rate channel.
For a special role for banks in monetary transmission, we need at least some
borrowers in the economy to be bank-dependent for their external finance. Fixed
costs to direct financial market participation is a frequently cited motivation for the
existence of bank-dependent borrowers. Banks can economise on the fixed costs of
monitoring, which makes them the natural provider of finance for borrowers that are
too small to be able to issue securities directly to the market. Hence, any changes in
banks’ willingness to lend will influence such borrowers directly, generating a bank
lending channel of transmission. Finally, minimum capital requirements (MCR) offer
one plausible mechanism that may affect banks’ willingness to lend when their capital
is close to the regulatory minimum.
The quantitative significance of the bank lending channel will depend partly on the
size of the lending contraction for a given monetary policy shock. This contraction
will be greater, the more interest elastic is the demand for money. With elastic money
demand, deposits (and hence loans) will show more variation in response to a policy
shock. Furthermore, the larger is the pool of bank-dependent borrowers, the bigger
will be the effect of the lending contraction on the real economy.

successful but have different probabilities of success. The result is over-investment as high probability
projects subsidise low probability ones.

14

3.3

The broad credit channel

Much of the recent theoretical research on the role of credit in economic fluctuations
has focused on ‘moral hazard’ problems in the principal-agent relationship that
characterises debt contracts. These models derive a role in the monetary transmission
mechanism for credit in general, and not just bank lending. Bernanke, Gertler and
Gilchrist (1999) and Carlstrom and Fuerst (2000) are perhaps the most widely cited
papers in this literature. In their models, there are ‘bad’ states of the world, when it
would be efficient for firms to default on their debts. But because of limited liability,
borrowers may prefer to default on their borrowings in other states of the world too.
And because ‘state verification’ is costly, lenders have to pay a cost to ascertain
whether the true state of the world warrants default or not. Lenders will therefore
demand an external finance premium in steady state to compensate them for this ‘state
verification cost’. The consequence of these credit market imperfections is that firms
will find it cheaper to invest out of retained funds than out of borrowed funds. Hence,
stronger firm cash flow will lead to higher investment. In general equilibrium, this
mechanism has the potential to provide amplification and propagation, because
aggregate demand shocks will affect firm cash flow, causing persistent movements in
firms’ average cost of capital and investment.
Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) assume incomplete contract enforceability and show that
entrepreneurs will be credit constrained. They argue that if the value of investment
projects is highly dependent on human/entrepreneurial capital, lenders will only issue
loans up to the value of physical capital. The reason for this is that physical capital
can be foreclosed upon, unlike human capital. The aggregate consequences are
similar to that of Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist: investment is highly dependent on
the value of collateral, which can generate amplification and persistence following
monetary shocks.
Cooley, Quadrini and Marimon (2000) also assume incomplete enforceability and
examine the structure of long-term incentive-compatible contracts between
entrepreneurs and lenders. They find that the incentive-compatible contract involves
higher investment and higher growth by new firms than by old, and that the
investment of new firms depends on cash flow. The intuition is the following: when
15

the firm is ‘young’ and/or current cash flow is high, there is an incentive for the
entrepreneur to repudiate the contract, and appropriate the entire cash flow. Hence,
the optimal contract has to provide sufficient incentives to the entrepreneur not to
default. This is achieved through growth in the value of the firm, which is achieved
through higher investment. In general equilibrium, the incentive-compatible
financial contracts that Cooley, Quadrini and Marimon examine can prolong and
amplify shocks.
So, to summarise, all these models of the broad credit channel rely on the presence of
moral hazard problems in debt markets. The appropriate design of financial contracts
under moral hazard leads to significant departures from the Modigliani-Miller axioms
and generates a role for credit in economic fluctuations. Incomplete insurance markets
are a further necessary condition for a role for credit in monetary transmission. If
private agents could buy an insurance policy against a ‘credit crunch’ none of the
above mechanisms would exert any effect on the economy; such insurance naturally
does not exist.
The broad credit channel influences economic conditions by leading to variations in
firms’ cost of capital in line with the financial health of firms. Hence this
transmission channel will be quantitatively stronger when the terms of debt contracts
are re-negotiable. For example, floating rate loans/bonds at a fixed spread over
government or money market instruments will not be affected by deterioration in
credit quality (instead the bond-holder will realise a loss on his initial investment).
On the other hand, loans/bonds where lenders can frequently change the spread (such
as those with embedded options) will be affected in line with the predictions of credit
channel theories. But even when most loans are at a fixed, long-term rate, the effect
of the credit channel will be increasing in the ‘churn’ in the debt stock – i.e. that
proportion of the debt stock that is new each period.

4

The empirical evidence

In the previous section we outlined the interest rate channel view of monetary
transmission and discussed the puzzles that motivated research on the role of credit in

16

economic fluctuations. We showed that there were two main ways through which
credit affects the economy. The ‘bank lending channel’ predicts that banks will
contract the supply of loans following a monetary shock. And the ‘broad credit
channel’ predicts that financial factors such as cash flow and net worth will be among
the determinants of firms’ expenditure. In this section we review some of the main
empirical findings relating to the role of financial frictions in the transmission
mechanism.
4.1

Evidence for the bank lending channel

The bank lending view of monetary transmission is strongly motivated by the
observation that a number of borrowers are dependent on banks for their sources of
external finance. Kashyap and Stein (1994), using data from the Quarterly Financial
Report for US manufacturing firms, have shown that in 1991, small firms were
dependent on banks for 82.9% of their external finance. For medium sized firms, the
share of bank debt was also very high, at 77%. This evidence, by itself, suggests that
the behaviour of banks may be extremely important for the transmission of monetary
policy.
A number of papers have studied the co-movements of output and total bank lending
following a monetary policy shock. Bernanke and Blinder (1992) have shown that
bank loans decline following a contractionary monetary policy shock and have argued
that this provides evidence for the existence of a bank lending channel. Aggregate
lending to corporates in the United Kingdom is also positively correlated with
investment, and leads GDP growth.
There is, however, a serious identification problem in econometric work that uses
aggregate data. Since loan demand is a function of the interest rate even under neoclassical capital markets, the interest rate channel is also capable of explaining the fall
in lending aggregates following a monetary policy shock. What bank lending channel
proponents need to demonstrate is that the fall in the quantity of lending was caused
by a fall in loan supply (which is consistent with the bank lending view) rather than
by a fall in loan demand (which is the ‘frictionless capital markets’ alternative
hypothesis).
17

Kashyap, Wilcox and Stein (1993) have attempted to solve this identification problem
by looking at the relative movements of bank lending and commercial paper issuance.
Their results show that the ratio of commercial paper to bank loans rises following a
monetary policy contraction. The authors argue that because large companies that are
unlikely to be credit constrained issue commercial paper, this form of non-bank
borrowing can provide a proxy for changes in demand for loans. Hence, Kashyap et
al argue that changes in the composition of debt indicate a contraction of bank loan
supply, which is consistent with an important bank lending channel.
However, Oliner and Rudebusch (1995) argue that, rather than indicating a
contraction in bank loan supply, Kashyap et al’s results are driven by a rise in
commercial paper issuance, and a reallocation of bank lending from small firms to
large firms. Hence, according to Oliner and Rudebusch, there is no evidence of a
reduction in the supply of bank lending across the board, although there is some
evidence that certain types of firms (e.g. small firms) do suffer a reduction in lending
following monetary contractions.
In line with the rest of the literature on financial market frictions, that on bank lending
has resorted to microeconomic data to get a better understanding of their role in the
transmission mechanism. Kashyap and Stein (2000) examine a large panel of US
banks spanning 20 years of quarterly data. They examine the way bank lending
responds to changes in monetary policy and find significant links between the size of
a bank’s lending contraction and the bank’s balance sheet liquidity position as
measured by the ratio of securities to total assets. The authors argue on the basis of
their results that up to a quarter of the response of lending to a monetary shock is due
to banks’ liquidity constraints. These numbers suggest that the bank lending channel
plays a significant role in the monetary transmission mechanism.
4.2

Evidence for the broad credit channel

Although bank lending is a very important source of external finance for firms, it is
not the sole one, and much of the empirical literature on credit frictions has

18

concentrated on identifying the importance of credit in general and not just bank
lending.
The behaviour of financial variables provides one possible source of information that
could be used to identify the effects of financial market frictions. Bernanke, Gertler
and Gilchrist (1999) show that corporate spreads over risk-free government rates
increase sharply in response to a contractionary monetary shock – this behaviour is a
key element of their theory of the credit channel. Evidence for the United Kingdom
in Hall (2001) actually suggests the opposite, i.e. that spreads fall in response to a
contractionary monetary policy shock.
But even taken at face value, the results of Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist do not lend
convincing support to the broad credit channel. Corporate spreads will fluctuate even
in the absence of credit frictions, simply because corporate risk or the market price of
risk changes. In addition, as Cooper, Hillman and Lynch (2001) show, evidence from
corporate bond spread indices is suspect, because individual spreads are a highly nonlinear function of individual debt-to-equity ratios. Consequently, changes to the
financial health of a small sub-sample of firms could affect aggregate spreads, while
being entirely consistent with frictionless credit markets.
But by far the largest literature on credit constraints has grown out of the failure of the
simple Q model of investment to match the data. According to neo-classical
investment theory with added adjustment costs, investment should depend on
marginal Q – the ratio of the additional value created by a unit of capital to the cost of
capital. And as Hayashi (1982) has shown, under the assumption of perfectly
competitive product markets, constant returns to scale and quadratic adjustment costs,
marginal Q will be equal to Tobin’s (average) Q – the ratio of the stock market value
of the firm to the replacement cost of its capital stock. This result has motivated a
number of papers to test whether an average Q model can adequately account for
firms’ investment behaviour. But the results of these empirical tests have not been
encouraging, with small or insignificant coefficients on average Q and low
explanatory power of the regressions.

19

These poor empirical results are, in some studies, taken as evidence of
misspecification caused by omitting the effects of credit constraints on investment. If
average Q fails to be a sufficient statistic for investment, and if other variables, such
as cash flow turn out to be significant in explaining investment, this is interpreted as
evidence in favour of a broad credit channel. Obviously, any test of the sufficiency of
average Q is a joint hypothesis of the assumption of no credit frictions and the
remaining assumptions underpinning average Q theory: there is plenty of scope for
other types of mis-specification (see Hubbard, 1998, for a recent survey).
The main approach of the literature to testing for the significance of credit constraints
on investment has been to split firms into credit-constrained and unconstrained on ‘a
priori’ grounds and then test for the significance of financial variables in explaining
the investment decisions of both sets of firms. Below is a very brief sketch of the
approaches in the literature.
In a pioneering study, Fazzari et. al. (1988) split their sample of US firms into firms
that pay high dividends and/or issue new shares (the credit unconstrained firms) and
into firms that pay low dividends and do not issue new shares (the constrained firms).
They find that their constrained firms are more sensitive to cash flow than the
unconstrained firms. Devereux and Schiantarelli (1990) split their sample of UK
firms according to firm size. However, their results are more mixed, with large firms
more sensitive to cash flow than small ones. Other studies such as Gilchrist and
Himmelberg (1995) have avoided using stock market derived measures of average Q.
Instead they have derived forward-looking proxies for the profit opportunities of the
firm using VAR forecasts. Gilchrist and Himmelberg find that the results from the
rest of the literature on credit constraints in investment equations continue to hold.
Bond and Meghir (1994) allow the firms to be subject to time-varying credit
constraints by defining a dummy variable, which depends on the financial policy of
the firm. The authors find that the investment of firms that pay low dividends and do
not issue new equity remains more sensitive to cash flow than the investment of other
(unconstrained) firms.
The literature has also attempted to analyse the behaviour of lending around changes
in monetary policy. Oliner and Rudebusch (1996) study the link between cash flow
20

and the investment of small and large firms around identified episodes of monetary
tightening. They find evidence that the link between cash flow and investment
becomes stronger for small firms following a monetary tightening, but does not
change following a monetary expansion. At the same time, they find that the role of
cash flow for the investment decisions of large firms is unrelated to monetary policy.
Oliner and Rudebusch interpret their results as evidence for the operation of the broad
credit channel.
Recent contributions to the literature have offered an alternative interpretation to the
presence of a statistically significant cash flow effect in investment. Cummins,
Hasset and Oliner (2000), Bond and Cummins (2000) and Bond et. al. (2001) have
argued that the above studies are using the wrong measure of Tobin’s Q. The stock
market derived measures used in the literature are only good proxies for the
investment opportunities faced by firms if the stock market reflects the net present
value (NPV) of firms’ future profits at all times. If equity prices are noisy, they will
only provide a very imperfect measure of the underlying economic concept of Tobin’s
Q. The authors construct an alternative measure of Tobin’s Q based on investment
analysts’ profit forecasts, and show that it is significant in investment equations, while
cash flow becomes insignificant. In this interpretation, the significance of cash flow
is not in itself sufficient evidence for the presence of a broad credit channel.
4.3

Summing up the evidence

The brief literature survey above has quoted some (albeit not uncontroversial
evidence) for the existence and importance of the credit channel. A number of studies
have shown that credit effects are particularly important for small firms during
periods of monetary tightening. These results are appealing from a theoretical point
of view since small firms are most likely to be facing severe informational problems,
and consequently credit constraints. Moreover, there are clear links between bank
lending behaviour and bank balance sheet liquidity, which suggests that the bank
lending may turn out to be a very significant source of monetary transmission when
the banking system is relatively illiquid.

21

However, the recent literature on investment equations has cast some doubts on
whether the significance of cash flow in Tobin’s Q regressions can be interpreted as
evidence for credit constraints. It is possible that the significance of cash flow in
investment equations may simply proxy for unobserved (to the econometrician) future
profit opportunities. Nevertheless, the results of studies such as Bond and Meghir
(1994) do suggest that the story may be more complex than this. Since cash flow is
more significant for firms that are likely to be credit constrained, this leaves us with
the possibility that the standard interpretation of credit constraints is the correct one.
And as Hubbard (1998) has shown, a number of other interpretations on the
significance of lagged cash flow in investment equations are possible. What we need
in order to separate the effects of future profit opportunities and credit on investment
is a theory of how credit constraints affect Tobin’s Q. More empirical and theoretical
work is needed in this area.

5

Why should a policymaker care?

In this section we shift the focus of the discussion to the implications of credit
frictions for the conduct of monetary policy – the ‘why should we care’ question. We
centre the discussion on two broad sets of issues. First, how should the presence of
such frictions in financial markets modify the conduct of monetary policy? Here we
focus on the optimal commitment equilibrium in a simple macroeconomic model as
the extent of financial frictions varies. Second, these frictions may have asymmetric
and temporary effects, leading to uncertainty about the timing and magnitude of the
transmission mechanism. The approach we adopt here is a robust control one.
5.1

The model

We take a simple closed economy New Keynesian macroeconomic model (which as a
baseline will not have a credit channel), of the Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1999) type.
We then ask how the presence of a credit channel will modify it, and how this in turn
will affect optimal monetary policy. The model’s equations are:

22

(1)

yt = Et yt +1 − σ ( Rt − Etπ t +1 ) + vt

(2)

π t = β [ω Etπ t +1 + (1 − ω ) π t −1 ] + µ yt + ut

where yt is the deviation of output from potential, πt is inflation, Rt is the nominal
interest rate, vt is an aggregate demand shock, and ut is a cost shock. Equation (1) is
an IS/aggregate demand equation, e.g. derived from an intertemporal optimality
condition for consumption. Equation (2) is a New Keynesian aggregate supply
schedule embodying a Buiter and Jewitt (1982)/Fuhrer and Moore (1995) model of
overlapping contracts. A period should be thought of as a quarter. We assume that the
monetary authorities care about the variability of output, inflation and the nominal
interest rate. The policymaker’s loss function is:

(3)

∞

Ω = å E0 β t [(π t )2 + ( yt ) 2 + γ ( Rt ) 2 ]
t =0

where for concreteness we have assumed equal weights on the variability of output
and inflation.
In what follows we do not explicitly model financial frictions. As noted earlier, there
are a variety of candidate models of financial frictions, each of which may lead to a
somewhat different modification of the model. But our objective is to draw some
general lessons for policy, so instead we merely note that financial frictions tend to
generate two key features: greater persistence in demand and output movements; and
an amplified response of demand to changes in interest rates. It is these features that
we then introduce into the model to capture the impact of financial frictions.
Obviously this ignores certain important aspects of frictions, in particular that their
effect may be non-linear or asymmetric. However, introducing such features is
complex and would take us well beyond the rather limited ambitions of the present
paper.
To see how persistence is generated, and following Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) and
Cooley, Quadrini and Marimon (2000), suppose that the economy consists of some

23

firms that have access to credit markets and others that are credit-constrained.
Expected profitability and the cost of borrowing will determine the investment
decisions of the former. Those of the latter will, by contrast, also depend on past
profits and cash flow. This will introduce extra persistence into the economy because
strong corporate performance generates improved cashflow, providing creditconstrained firms with increased funds for future investment. Higher investment at
the firm level then leads to stronger economic growth and additional improvements to
profitability, cash flow and net worth, leading to further investment, and so on.
Hence, the presence of credit constrained firms, which invest mainly out of retained
profits will produce an IS curve with more output persistence:
(1’)

yt = α Et yt +1 + (1 − α ) yt −1 − σ ( Rt − Etπ t +1 ) + vt

Of course, as Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1999) argue, there may be a number of
features, other than credit constraints, which can generate endogenous output
persistence. For example, investment adjustment costs and habit persistence in
consumption can both be used to motivate persistence in the IS curve. But even so,
the presence of financial frictions should generate greater persistence than in their
absence.
With regard to amplification, in credit channel models the interest rate faced by firms,
Rft, typically depends on the policy rate and an external finance premium which is
increasing in the debt-to-equity ratio, Dt/Et, of the firm
(4)

Rt f = Rt + f t (Dt / Et )

(f’ > 0)

But the value of equity will itself be a function of the interest rate and expected future
equity values. If, as is likely, equity prices fall when the interest rate increases, the
external finance premium will rise, magnifying the impact of policy on the economy.
We therefore capture the impact of the external finance premium by increasing the
parameter σ.

24

As our results are intended to be illustrative, we do not attempt a precise calibration of
the model. Instead, we employ plausible parameters drawn from the existing
literature on simple rules in small macroeconomic models, although note these are
themselves usually informed by empirical research. Thus the weight on expected
inflation in the supply curve, ω, is set to 0.2 in line with Batini and Haldane (1999)
and Batini and Nelson (2000). The response of inflation to activity, µ, is set to 0.1,
which is broadly consistent with the estimates of Bean (1998) for the United Kingdom
(recall that a period is a quarter).
The parameters of the aggregate demand schedule will vary depending on the strength
of the credit frictions. In order to capture the degree of financial frictions in the
economy we vary α between 0 and 1, with a low α indicating strong credit frictions.
Chart 2 demonstrates the effect of varying α by plotting the auto-correlation functions
for output in the model conditional on a standard Taylor rule. As the chart shows, the
auto-correlation function (ACF) of output displays more persistence in the ‘credit
frictions’ case. The other parameter we use to calibrate the credit channel is σ , where
a high value indicates high interest rate sensitivity. For the parameter σ there are a
substantial number of estimates available. Estimates for the US range from 0.16
(McCallum and Nelson, 1999) to 6.0 (Rotemberg and Woodford, 1997). The real
business cycle literature normally sets σ equal to unity. We set the benchmark value
of σ to 0.6, in line with Neiss and Nelson (2001). We set our range at between 0.1
and 1.5, encompassing all but the very largest estimates of σ for the US or the UK.
There is less evidence on α. To get a feel for the appropriate value, we estimated (1’)
with UK data, conditional on σ = 0.6, using instrumental variables. This suggested a
value close to 0.5. To get a feel for the time variation in this parameters, we then
estimated a set of rolling regressions where we allowed α to vary, conditional on

σ = 0.6. This procedure suggested relatively little time variation in the point estimate
for α, but with very substantial standard errors. On the basis of that, we calibrate the
‘strong credit frictions’ model with α set to 0.1 and the ‘no credit frictions’ model
with α set to 0.9, with a benchmark value of 0.5.

25

With regard to the policymaker’s preferences, we set γ to 0.25, implying some
concern about interest rate variability, but to a much lesser extent than with the
variances of output and inflation. Finally both the shocks are assumed to be white
noise, with a standard deviation of 0.5%.
5.2

Optimal monetary policy under different degrees of financial friction

We start by considering how the optimal monetary policy differs from one economy
to another according to the extent of financial frictions, i.e. how policy is affected by
the values of σ and α. We do not consider the more complex question of how policy
should respond during the transition from one steady state to another, e.g. during a
financial liberalisation.
Throughout, we assume the policymaker has access to an appropriate commitment
technology. Following Woodford (1999), the optimal commitment equilibrium (also
described as the ‘timeless perspective’ by McCallum and Nelson, 2000) involves
minimisation of the loss function at ‘the beginning of time’.7 This gives an optimal
contingent plan for the interest rate, which by assumption the policymaker can
commit to.
The policy problem is thus:
(5)

∞

minπ , y , R å E0 β t [(π t ) 2 + ( yt )2 + γ ( Rt )2 ] ,
t =0

subject to the IS curve (1’) and the supply curve (2). The first-order conditions
characterising the optimum under commitment are:

(6a)

dL
= (1 − ω ) β 2 Etκ t +1 − κ t + ωκ t −1 + σβ −1λt −1 − π t = 0
dπ

(6b)

dL
= (1 − α ) βλt +1 − λt + αβ −1λt −1 + µκ t − yt = 0
dy

(6c)

dL
= γ Rt + σλt = 0
dR

7

McCallum and Nelson (2000) argue that the commitment equilibrium can be interpreted as a binding
commitment on the central bank that was made at some indefinite point in the past.

26

(6d)

dL
= yt − α Et yt +1 − (1 − α ) yt −1 + σ ( Rt − Etπ t +1 ) = 0
dλ

(6e)

dL
= π t − βω Etπ t +1 − β (1 − ω ) π t −1 − µ yt = 0
dκ

where L is the Lagrangian and λ and κ are the Lagrange multipliers on, respectively,
the IS curve and the supply curve. Equations (6a) to (6e) form a system of secondorder difference equations, which we solve using the Klein/Minimum State Variable
solution algorithm. We then use the solved model to plot dynamic time paths for the
endogenous variables following shocks.
Chart 3 shows the dynamic response of the system to a cost shock for two pairs of IS
curve parameters: σ = 0.4 and α = 0.9, which we take as the ‘no frictions’ case; and
σ = 0.8 and α = 0.1, corresponding to strong frictions. The chart shows that the
variability of the output gap and inflation are little affected by the removal of
frictions. This is because there are offsetting influences on the second moments of
these variables. The reduction of the potency of monetary policy increases variability
holding everything else constant. Acting in the opposite direction is the increase in
flexibility brought about by the reduction in credit market frictions. This tends to
stabilise output and inflation because firms and households become less sensitive to
current economic conditions. The behaviour of policy does, however, change
dramatically. The nominal interest rate rises less initially, but the rise is more
persistent. As Chart 3 shows, the nominal interest rate becomes considerably less
volatile when financial frictions diminish. This is related to the result in Woodford
(2000), where binding commitment can affect output and inflation volatility now. So
when firms are unconstrained in their investment decisions, gradual movements in the
policy rate following a shock will, through the expectations channel, affect output and
inflation now. This allows the central bank to stabilise output and inflation with
lower instrument variability. In contrast, when financial markets are subject to
significant imperfections, monetary policy needs to be more aggressive in order to
prevent persistent fluctuations in inflation and output.
Chart 4 plots the two economies’ response to a negative demand shock. The chart
shows that policy is more aggressive in the ‘credit frictions’ case – the fall in interest
27

rates is larger than in the ‘no credit frictions case’. The chart also shows that, in the
optimal equilibrium, policy avoids volatility of output and inflation in the credit
constrained economy. In contrast, the unconstrained economy is characterised by
overshooting of both output and inflation. This is again related to the benefit of
commitment – when firms and households are forward-looking and unconstrained in
their decisions, policy can affect their current decisions through a binding
commitment to future policy actions.
Table 2 shows the steady-state standard deviations of the endogenous variables in our
model. The table shows again that the main effect of financial change in our simple
framework is to reduce the variability of interest rates needed to stabilise inflation and
output. But overall, provided the policymaker knows the values of α and σ, it seems
that it does not matter whether frictions are present or not, at least far as stabilisation
is concerned. Of course, the presence of financial frictions will affect the level of
potential output – typically reducing it below the symmetric information efficient
equilibrium – so the application of other policies to attenuate frictions caused by
informational asymmetries, etc., may well be welfare enhancing.
5.3

Policy when the impact of financial frictions is uncertain

In this section, we recognise that there is considerable uncertainty about the impact of
financial frictions on the transmission mechanism and explore the consequences of
that uncertainty for policy design. Of course, even if policy affects the economy
solely through the classical interest rate channel, there may still be uncertainty about
the interest elasticity of investment and other key parameters. But as more evidence
accumulates one might hope to be able to pin these down more precisely. By contrast,
the potentially asymmetric and episodic nature of financial frictions is likely to lead to
uncertainty that cannot be resolved purely through the passage of time and the
accumulation of more aggregate data. There are at least two reasons for this. First,
following Kocherlakota (2001), credit constraints are fundamentally an asymmetric
propagation mechanism, because they are most often binding when firms want to
increase their borrowing in a downturn. Ascertaining the extent to which they bind
requires detailed microeconomic evidence that is unlikely to be available to the
policymaker. Secondly, following van den Heuvel (2001), the supply of credit is

28

likely to be influenced by the health of the financial system as well as the shocks
hitting it at any point in time. Hence, to the extent that policymakers do not have
precise knowledge of the state of the financial system, they will face considerable
uncertainty when trying to evaluate the likely response of the economy to changes in
monetary policy.
In what follows, we attempt to capture this innate uncertainty by thinking of α and σ
as time-varying parameters that respond both to aggregate shocks hitting the financial
sector over the course of the business cycle and to developments at the
microeconomic level. Ideally, one would make them functions of the endogenous
variables in the model (such as output and the real interest rate), but this results in a
non-linear system greatly complicating the problem of finding the optimal policy.
Such a task, while worthwhile, lies beyond the limited ambitions of this paper.
The standard approach to policy design under parameter uncertainty follows the
classic paper by Brainard (1967). That approach assumes the policymaker also knows,
or can formulate, a distribution for the unknown parameters; optimal control
procedures can then be applied in the standard way. In practice the policymaker may
not feel sufficiently well informed to formulate such a distribution. This is particularly
relevant in the current context where detailed microeconomic evidence would
probably be required to formulate such a distribution. For that reason we adopt a
robust control approach, along the lines of Hansen and Sargent (2000) and Giannoni
(2001). In particular we suppose that, due to the complexity of the financial sector,
the monetary authority does not know, and cannot formulate, a probability
distribution over the key parameter values. Instead they only know the range of
possible parameter realisations (assumed fixed for all time). This replaces the
Brainardian problem of uncertain and time-varying parameters with one of Knightian
parameter uncertainty.
Following Hansen and Sargent (2000) and Giannoni (2001), the robust policy rule in
these circumstances is the one that minimises the objective function in the worst case
scenario (the min-max Nash equilibrium). This can be thought of as a game between
the policymaker and a Malevolent Nature, with the policymaker choosing a policy

29

that minimises the loss function, and Nature picking a parameter combination
designed to maximise the loss, given that policy is conducted optimally.
Chart 5 below gives a diagrammatic representation of the solution. We define ranges
for α and σ ( α ∈ [ 0.1, 0.9] , σ ∈ [ 0.1,1.5] ), and compute the welfare loss in the
commitment equilibrium for each parameter combination. So each point on the chart
corresponds to the minimised social welfare loss conditional on a given set of
parameters. It is easy to see from the chart that Nature will pick α = 0.1 and σ = 0.1,
the parameters which give the highest minimised welfare loss.
We argued above that financial frictions tend to increase σ (through the effect of the
external finance premium) and reduce α (by increasing credit constraints), and that
low financial frictions would thus be characterised by a relatively small σ and a large
α. But the worst case scenario involves low σ and low α. So this case corresponds to
one where the external finance premium is unaffected by the change in the policy rate;
see equation (4). In turn this will be the case if either the external finance premium is
only weakly responsive to the debt-equity ratio or the valuation of equity is relatively
unaffected by changes in official rates.
5.4

Robustness versus performance

A robust policy like that derived here ensures relatively good outcomes in the worst
case scenario. But it may produce relatively poor outcomes for other realisations of
the parameters. And in many cases, including that considered here, the robust policy
optimises performance at the boundary of the support of the parameters. It is
consequently very sensitive to where these boundaries are located. There is something
rather unsatisfactory in assuming that the policymaker can say with great confidence
what the range of feasible parameter values is, whilst at the same time positing total
ignorance about the relative likelihood of different parameter values occurring within
the distribution. What we really seek, therefore, is some sort of half-way house
between Brainardian and Knightian uncertainty.

30

To see the force of the first of these points, suppose that the policymaker is willing to
take the view that the “most likely” realisation of the parameter values corresponds to
the intermediate values σ = 0.6 and α = 0.5. As an alternative strategy (we make no
claims for optimality here), consider setting policy to minimise the expected loss
assuming that the parameters take these values (the ‘Modal rule’). Chart 6 shows the
relative welfare loss (on the vertical axis, in log differences) under the Robust rule
and under the Modal rule across the parameter space. Negative values in the chart
indicate that the Robust rule delivers lower expected loss than the Modal rule (and
vice versa). The key conclusion to be drawn here is that the Modal rule performs
better than the Robust rule for most of the parameter space, but its performance
deteriorates rapidly as monetary policy loses its potency and credit constraints bite.
However, the deterioration only occurs at values of σ and α below 0.2 – the very
extreme of the parameter range we consider.
Charts 7 and 8 illustrate the same point in two dimensions. Chart 7 computes the
expected losses under the Robust and Modal rules (we discuss the ‘Intermediate rule’
below) as we vary σ for three different values of α. Chart 8 computes the expected
losses as we vary α for three different values of σ. Again, we can see how the Robust
rule is dominated by the Modal rule for most of the parameter space. The Robust
rule, however, delivers insurance against the worst case scenario.
Now suppose that the policymaker has some prior knowledge on the distribution of
the parameters, but is unwilling or unable to fully specify it. We consider a
modification of the Robust control approach in which the policymaker is prepared to
make some statement about the relative likelihood of different parameter values and a
Malevolent Nature then chooses the worst possible distribution. The policymaker then
minimises the expected loss, using the standard approach, and given that distribution.
To illustrate this, suppose that the policymaker knows the most likely outcome (σM)
and the support of the distribution of σ ([σLOW, σHIGH]), but not its shape. However,
(s)he is prepared to state that values closer to the mode are at least as likely as values
far away from the mode. As discussed above, the conduct of policy becomes more
difficult for smaller values of σ. So, Nature would like to place as much probability

31

as possible into the lower tail of the distribution of σ. But she is constrained in her
choice of distribution, because values closer to the mode must be at least as likely as
values further away from the mode. Then it is easy to see that the worst distribution
Nature can inflict upon the policymaker is a uniform distribution over the support
[σ LOW , σ M ] ; see Chart 9. Conditional on this distribution, the policymaker then
solves a standard optimal control problem over the relevant subset of the parameter
space. We refer to this policy as the Intermediate rule, as it combines elements of both
standard policy optimisation and robust control.
To see what effect this might have in the present model, assume the support of σ and
α is as above, and that the modal values are also as given above. Then Malevolent
Nature picks a uniform distribution defined over {σ, α}, {[0.1, 0.6], [0.1, 0.5]}. The
policymaker then minimises the expected loss, given this parameter distribution. This
last step is a little complex in even this relatively simple set up, but to get a feel for
the implications of the approach we have calculated the expected welfare losses where
the optimal policy is calculated assuming that σ and α are equal to their means with
respect to the distribution selected by Nature, i.e. just the average of σM and σLOW,
and αM and αLOW, respectively. This rule, of course, does not correspond to the
optimal rule calculated over the entire subspace, but it is probably a reasonable
approximation.
Chart 10 compares the performance of the Modal and Intermediate rules over the
feasible parameter range. The Intermediate rule gives roughly comparable
performance to the Modal rule, while still providing some insurance against the worst
case scenario. Of course, as Chart 11 comparing the Robust and Intermediate rules
shows, this insurance is not complete: the Robust rule still performs better in the
worst case. But the Intermediate rule performs better than the Modal rule under a
wider range of parameter values than the Robust rule, and is hence less sensitive to
extreme values. Charts 7 and 8 help to make the comparison between the rules
clearer. Again, we can see that the Intermediate rule combines good performance
across the permissable parameter range with (limited) insurance properties in the
worst case.

32

6

Concluding Remarks

In this paper we have surveyed some of the ways that financial frictions can augment
the classical interest rate channel whereby changes in monetary policy affect the
economy. The difficulty of providing a satisfactory explanation of the magnitude and
persistence of the effects of changes in the official interest rate relying solely on the
classical channel suggests that financial frictions may be an important, and possibly
very important, part of the transmission mechanism. However, these frictions may be
manifested in a variety of ways, as witnessed by the variety of theoretical models in
the credit channel and bank lending literatures.
Sorting out the relative importance of these different channels is hampered by the fact
that the competing theories often have similar implications, at least on aggregate data.
However, the microeconomic evidence does suggest that both the credit channel and
bank lending channel are operative.
With respect to the implications for the conduct of monetary policy, a key feature of
financial frictions is that they tend to increase persistence and also amplify the effect
of changes in official interest rates. In our New Keynesian macroeconomic model, the
presence of such frictions means that policy has to be rather more aggressive. This is
because the forward-looking elements in the transmission mechanism are relatively
less important when there are frictions, so that expectations of future movements in
interest rates have a more muted effect on the economy today.
The nature of these financial frictions, and their potentially asymmetric and episodic
character, are also likely to introduce (even greater) uncertainty into the magnitude
and timing of the response of the economy to changes in monetary policy. Here we
drew on the recent robust control literature to explore how optimal policy under
Knightian uncertainty would be affected. That approach suggests that the policymaker
should act on the assumption that credit constraints are important (so persistence is
high) but that the external finance premium is not very responsive to the level of
interest rates (so that demand is not particularly responsive to interest rates).
Arguably, the robust control approach places too much weight on avoiding bad

33

outcomes in extreme cases. We therefore considered a case that is intermediate
between robust control and standard optimal control where the economy is subject to
a known stochastic law of motion. In our intermediate case the policymaker can say
something, but not everything about the nature of the distribution (s)he is faced with.
This approach potentially moderates the sensitivity to extreme events found under the
standard robust control approach.
Clearly there is still much more to be said and written on this topic. However, we
hope that the papers at this conference will lead to advancement in our understanding
in this area.

34

References
Agresti, A M and Mojon, B. (2001), ‘Some stylised facts on the euro-area business
cycle’, ECB Working Paper 95
Aoki, K, Proudman, J and Vlieghe, G. (2001), ‘Houses as collateral: has the link
between house prices and consumption in the UK changed?’, Bank of England Mimeo
Batini, N and Haldane, A. (1999), ‘Forward looking rules for monetary policy’,
Bank of England working paper series 91.
Batini, N and Nelson E. (2000), ‘Optimal horizons for inflation targeting’, Bank of
England working paper series 119.
Baxter, M and King, R. (1999), ‘Measuring Business Cycles: Approximate BandPass Filters for Economic Time Series’, Review of Economics and Statistics, 81(4),
pp. 575-93.
Bean, C. (1998), ‘The New UK Monetary Arrangements: A View from the
Literature’, Economic Journal, 108(451), pp. 1795-1809
Benati, L. (2001), ‘Band-pass filtering, cointegration, and business cycle analysis’,
Bank of England Working Paper 142
Bernanke, B S and Blinder, A. (1988), ‘Credit, money and aggregate demand’,
American Economic Review 78, pp. 435-439
Bernanke, B S and Blinder, A. (1992), ‘The Federal Funds Rate and the Channels of
Monetary Transmission’, American-Economic-Review, 82(4), pp 901-21.
Bernanke, B S and Gertler, M. (1995), ‘Inside the black box: the credit channel of
monetary policy transmission’, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol 9, No 4, p 2748.
Bernanke, B S and Gertler, M. (1999), ‘Should Central Banks respond to
movements in asset prices?’ American-Economic-Review, 91(2), pp. 253-57
Bernanke, B S, Gertler, M and Gilchrist, S. (1999), ‘The financial accelerator in a
quantitative business cycle framework’, Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 1,
Ed. by J. B. Taylor and M. Woodford
Bester, H. (1985), ‘Screening vs rationing in credit markets with imperfect
information’, American Economic Review 75(4): 850-55
Blackburn, K and Ravn, M. (1992), ‘Business Cycles in the United Kingdom: Facts
and Fictions’, Economica, 59(236), pp. 383-401.
Bond, S and Cummins, J G. (2000), ‘Nosiy share prices and the Q model of
investment’, mimeo

35

Bond, S, Klemm, A, Newton-Smith, R and Vlieghe, J. (2001), ‘Investment, Tobin’s
Q and earnings forecasts’, Bank of England, mimeo
Bond, S and Meghir, C. (1994), ‘Dynamic investment models and the firm’s
financial policy’, Review of Economic Studies 61, 197-222.
Brainard, W. (1967), ‘Uncertainty and the effectiveness of Monetary Policy’,
American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, Vol 57, pp. 411-25.
Buiter, W and Jewitt, I. (1981), ‘Staggered Wage Setting with Real Wage
Relativities: Variations on a Theme of Taylor’, Manchester School of Economic and
Social Studies, 49(3), pp. 211-28.
Carlstrom, C T and Fuerst, T. S. (2000), ‘Monetary shocks, agency costs and
business cycles’, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working paper series 0011.
Cecchetti, S G, Genberg, H, Lipsky and Wadhwani, S. (2000), ‘Asset prices and
central bank policy’, CEPR Discussion Paper
Chami, R and Cosimano, T. (2001), ‘Monetary policy with a touch of Basel’, IMF
Working Paper 151
Christiano, L J, Eichenbaum, M and Evans, C. (1996), ‘Sticky Price and Limited
Participation Models of Money: A Comparison’, National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper: 5804
Christiano, L J, Eichenbaum, M and Evans, C. (1999), ‘Monetary policy shocks:
what have we learned and to what end?’, Chapter2, Handbook of Macroeconomics,
Volume 1, Ed. by J. B. Taylor and M. Woodford
Christiano, L J, Eichenbaum, M and Evans, C. (2001), ‘Nominal rigidities and the
dynamic effects of a shock to monetary policy’, National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper: 8403
Christiano, L J and Gust, C. (1998), ‘Taylor Rules in a Limited Participation
Model’, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper: 7017
Clarida, R Gali, J and Gertler, M. (1999), ‘The science of monetary policy: a new
keynesian perspective’, Journal of Economic Literature, Vol 37, p 1661-1707.
Clements, B, Kontolemis, Z and Levy, J. (2001), ‘Monetary policy under EMU:
differences in the transmission mechanism?’, IMF Working Paper 102
Cooley, T, Quadrini, V and Marimon, R. (2001), ‘Aggregate consequences of
limited contract enforceability’, mimeo
Cooper, N, Hillman R and Lynch, D. (2001), ‘Is there a US credit crunch?’, Bank of
England Quarterly Bulletin, Volume 41, Number 1

36

Cummins, J G, Hassett, K A and Oliner, S. D. (1999), ‘Investment behavior,
observable expectations, and internal funds’, Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, Finance and Economics Discussion Series: 99/27.
DeMeza, D and Webb, D. (1985), ‘Too much investment: a problem of asymmetric
information’, Quarterly Journal of Economics
Devereux, M and Schiantarelli, F. (1990), ‘Investment, financial factors and cash
flow from UK panel data’, in G. Hubbard (ed.), Information, capital market and
investment, Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press
Dhar, S and Millard, S. (2000), ‘A limited participation model of the monetary
transmission mechanism in the United Kingdom’ Bank of England Working Paper
117
Dhar, S, Pain, D and Thomas, R. (2000), ‘A small structural empirical model of the
UK monetary transmission mechanism’ Bank of England Working Paper 113
Faia, E. (2001), ‘Stabilization policy in a two country model and the role of financial
frictions’, ECB Working Paper 56
Faia, E and Monacelli, T. (2001), ‘Credit frictions and the exchange rate regime:
mundell-fleming enters the financial world’, mimeo
Fazzari, S M R, Hubbard, G and Petersen, B. C. (1988), ‘Financing constraints and
corporate investment’, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, p 141-195.
Freixas, X and Rochet, J. C. (1999) The Microeconomics of Banking, MIT Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts
Fuhrer, J and Moore, G. (1995), ‘Inflation persistence’, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 110(1), pp. 127-59
Gertler, M, Gilchrist, S and Natalucci, F. M. (2000), ‘External constraints on
monetary policy and the financial accelerator’, mimeo
Giannoni, M. P. (2001), ‘Robust optimal monetary policy in a forward-looking
model with parameter and shock uncertainty’, Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
mimeo
Gilchrist, S and Himmelberg, C. P. (1995), ‘Evidence on the role of cash flow for
investment’, Journal of Monetary Economics; 36(3), pp. 541-72
Hall, S. (1998), ‘Empirical evidence on the credit channel’, Bank of England mimeo.
Hall, S. (2000), ‘Financial accelerator effects in UK business cycles’, Bank of
England Mimeo
Hansen, L P and Sargent, T. (2001), ‘Robust Control and Model Uncertainty’,
American Economic Review; 91(2), pp. 60-66

37

Hayashi, F. (1982), ‘Tobin’s marginal Q and average Q: a neoclassical
interpretation’, Econometrica, 50, 213-24.
House, C. L. (2000), ‘Adverse selection and the accelerator’, Job Market Paper.
Hubbard, R. G. (1998), ‘Capital market imperfections and investment’, Journal of
Economic Literature, Vol XXXVI, p193-225
Julius, D, Mahadeva, L, Roger, S and Sterne, G. (2000), in Monetary policy
frameworks in a global context, L. Mahadeva and G. Sterne (ed.), Centre for Central
Banking Studies, Bank of England
Kashyap, A K and Stein, J. C. (1994), ‘Monetary policy and bank lending’, in N. G.
Mankiw (ed.), Monetary Policy, IL, University of Chicago Press
Kashyap, A K and Stein, J. C. (2000), ‘What do a million observations on banks say
about the transmission of monetary policy?’, American Economic Review
p407-428.
Kashyap, A K, Stein J C and Wilcox, D. W. (1993), ‘Monetary Policy and Credit
Conditions: Evidence from the Composition of External Finance’, American
Economic Review; 83(1), pp. 78-98.
Kocherlakota, N. (2000), ‘Creating Business Cycles through Credit Constraints’,
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review; 24(3), pp. 2-10
Klein, P. (1997), ‘Using the Generalized Schur Form to Solve a Multivariate Linear
Rational Expectations Model’, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 24(10),
pp. 1405-23
Kyotaki, N and Moore, J. (1997), ‘Credit cycles’, Journal of Political Economy,
Vol. 105, pp. 211-48
Layard, R, Nickell, S and Jackman, R. Unemployment: Macroeconomic
performance and the labour market, Oxford University Press, 1991.
Leeper, E M, Sims, C and Zha, T. (1996), ‘What Does Monetary Policy Do?’,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1996, pp. 1-63
Lown, C S and Morgan D. P. (2001), ‘Credit effects in the monetary mechanism,
then and now’, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Mimeo
Lown, C S, Peristiani, S and Robinson K. J. (1999), ‘What was behind the M2
breakdown?’, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Financial Industry Studies Working
Paper: 02/99
McCallum, B and Nelson, E. (1999), ‘An Optimizing IS-LM Specification for
Monetary Policy and Business Cycle Analysis’, Journal of Money,
Credit, and Banking 31, 296–316.

38

McCallum, B and Nelson, E. (2000), ‘Monetary Policy for an Open Economy: An
Alternative Framework with Optimizing Agents and Sticky Prices’, Oxford Review of
Economic Policy, 16(4), Winter 2000, pp. 74-91
McCallum, B and Nelson, E. (2000), ‘Timeless perspective vs. discretionary
monetary policy in forward-looking models’, mimeo
Meese, R A and Rogoff, K. (1983), ‘Empirical Exchange Rate Models of the
Seventies: Do They Fit Out of Sample?’, Journal of International Economics; 14(12), pp. 3-24
Meltzer, A. H. (1995), ‘Monetary, credit and (other) transmission processes: a
monetarist perspective’, Journal of economic perspectives, Vol 9, No 4, p 49-72.
Millard, S. (2000), ‘An examination of the monetary transmission mechanism in the
United Kingdom’, Bank of England Mimeo
Millard, S and Wells, S. (2001), ‘The role of asset prices in transmitting monetary
and other shocks’, Bank of England Mimeo
Mojon, B and Peersman, G. (2001), ‘A VAR description of the effects of the
monetary policy in the countries of the euro area’, ECB Working Paper 92
Neiss, K S, and Nelson, E. (2001). ‘The Real Interest Rate Gap as an
Inflation Indicator’. CEPR Discussion Paper No. 2848.
NBER Summer Institute, (2001), ‘The eurosystem monetary transmission network’,
NBER progress report.
Oliner, S D and Rudebusch, G. D. (1995), ‘Is there a bank lending channel for
monetary policy?’ Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Review 1995,
No 2.
Oliner, S D and Rudebusch, G. D. (1996), ‘Is there a broad credit channel for
monetary policy?, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Review 1996,
No 1.
Peersman, G and Smets, F. (2000), ‘Cyclical and industry effects of monetary policy
in the euro area’, ECB Mimeo
Peersman, G and Smets, F. (2001), ‘Are the effects of monetary policy in the euro
area greater in recessions than in booms?’ ECB Working Paper 52
Peersman, G and Smets, F. (2001), ‘The monetary transmission mechanism in the
euro area: more evidence from VAR analysis’ ECB Working Paper 91
Romer, C D, and Romer, D. H. (1990), ‘New Evidence on the Monetary
Transmission Mechanism’, Brookings Paper on Economic Activity 1: 149-98

39

Rothschild, M and Stiglitz, J. (1976), ‘Equilibrium in competitive insurance
markets: an essay on the economics of imperfect information’, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 90(4): 630-49.
Rotemberg, J, and Woodford, M. (1997). ‘An Optimisation-Based
Econometric Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy’, NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 12, 297–346.
Schiantarelli, F. (1996), ‘Financial constraints and investment: methodological issues
and international evidence’, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, vol. 12, no. 2.
Smets, F and Wouters, R. (2001), ‘Monetary policy in an estimated stochastic
dynamic general equilibrium model of the euro area’, ECB mimeo
Spence, A. S. (1973), ‘Job Market Signalling’, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
87(3), pp. 355-74
Stiglitz, J E and Weiss, A. (1981), ‘Credit rationing in markets with imperfect
information’, American Economic Review, 71, 393-410.
Svensson, L. (2001), ‘Robust control made simple’, mimeo
Taylor, J. B. (1995), ‘The monetary transmission mechanism: an empirical
framework’, Journal of economic perspectives, Vol 9, No 4 p 11-26.
Van den Heuvel, S. (2001), ‘The bank capital channel of monetary policy’, mimeo
Walsh, C. (1998), ‘Monetary theory and policy’, MIT Press.

40

Chart 1: The effects of a monetary policy shock in the Euro-area,
the United States and the United Kingdom
Euro-area

United States

Output

United Kingdom

Output

0.10

Output

0.20

0.30
0.20

0.10

0.10

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.10

-0.10
-0.10
-0.20

-0.20
-0.30

-0.20

-0.40
-0.50

-0.30

-0.30
1

3

5

7

9

11

13

1

15

3

5

Prices

7

9

11

13

1

15

3

5

Prices

0.05

7

9

11

13

15

9

11

13

15

11

13

15

Prices

0.10

0.30
0.20

0.00

0.10

0.00

0.00
-0.10
-0.10

-0.05

-0.20
-0.30

-0.10

-0.40

-0.20

-0.50
-0.60
-0.30

-0.15
1

3

5

7

9

11

13

1

15

3

5

7

9

11

13

15

-0.70
1

3

Interest Rate

Interest Rate
0.40

0.60

1.00

0.30

0.50

0.80

0.40

0.60

0.30

0.40

0.20

0.20

0.20

5

7

Interest Rate

0.10
0.00
-0.10
-0.20

0.10

0.00

0.00

-0.20

-0.10

-0.40

-0.20

-0.30
1

3

5

7

9

11

13

15

-0.60
1

3

5

7

9

11

13

15

1

3

5

7

9

Note: Results for Euro-area and US obtained from Peersman and Smets (2001). Confidence bands are at 90%
levels. Standard error for the Euro-area and the US obtained using a bootstrap procedure, while those for the UK
are asymptotic standard errors.

Chart 2: The auto-correlation function for output
ACF(y)
1

correlation coefficient

credit frictions
no credit frictions

0.5

0

-0.5

0

2

4

6
period

8

10

Chart 3: Response to a unit cost shock

Output gap response
0

-0.5
No credit frictions
Credit frictions
-1

0

2

4

6
8
10
12
14
Nominal interest rate response

16

18

20

0

2

4

6

14

16

18

20

0

2

4

6

14

16

18

20

2

1

0

8
10
12
Inflation response

1.5
1
0.5
0

8

10

12

periods after the shock

Chart 4: Optimal equilibrium under a demand shock
Output gap response
0.5

0
No credit frictions
Credit frictions
-0.5

0

2

4

6
8
10
12
14
Nominal interest rate response

16

18

20

0

2

4

6

14

16

18

20

0

2

4

6

14

16

18

20

0.5
0
-0.5
-1

8
10
12
Inflation response

0.05

0

-0.05

8

10

12

periods after the shock

Chart 5: The optimal commitment loss surface

Discounted Sum of Losses

550
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
0

0
0.2

0.4

0.5
0.6

0.8

α

1

1

σ

Chart 6
Relative losses: Robust-Modal rule

0.15
0.1
0.05

per cent

0
-0.05
-0.1
-0.15
-0.2
-0.25
-0.3
1

0.8

0.6

0.4

α

0.2

0

0

0.2

0.4

σ

0.6

0.8

1

Chart 7: The performance of Robust, Modal and Intermediate rules under
parameter uncertainty (1)
α = 0.1

α = 0.5

800
R rule
M rule
I rule

340

320

600

500

400

Sum of discounted losses

400
Sum of discounted losses

Sum of discounted losses

700

350

300

250

300

200

α = 0.9

450

0

0.5

σ

1

200

300

280

260

240

0

0.5

σ

1

220

0

0.5

σ

1

Chart 8: The performance of Robust, Modal and Intermediate rules under
parameter uncertainty (2)
σ = 0.1

σ = 0.5

800
R rule
M rule
I rule

270
265

600

500

Sum of discounted losses

290
Sum of discounted losses

700
Sum of discounted losses

σ = 0.9

300

280
270
260
250

400
240
300

0

0.5

α

1

230

260
255
250
245
240
235
230

0

0.5

α

1

225

0

0.5

α

1

Chart 9: The worst case distribution
Density

σ LOW

σM

σ HIGH

Chart 10
Relative losses: Intermediate-Modal rule
0.05

per cent

0

-0.05

-0.1

-0.15

-0.2
1
0.5
0

α

0

0.2

0.4

σ

0.6

0.8

1

Chart 11
Relative losses: Robust-Intermediate rule

0.15
0.1

per cent

0.05
0
-0.05
-0.1
-0.15
-0.2
1
0.5

α

0

0

0.2

0.4

σ

0.6

0.8

1

Table 1.a: Business fluctuations of the UK economy (1970-2000)

Variables (t)

Std (X)

Std (X) / Std
(GDP)

Cross correlation with GDP at (t+k)
-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

GDP
Consumption
Investment
Cumulated inventories

2.00
2.19
4.97
3.05

1.00
1.09
2.48
1.52

0.48
0.54
0.63
0.93

0.66
0.64
0.74
0.91

0.83
0.73
0.81
0.83

0.95
0.80
0.84
0.70

1.00
0.82
0.82
0.53

0.76
0.74
0.35

0.63
0.62
0.18

0.46
0.48
0.03

0.26
0.33
-0.10

M0
M4
M4-lending individuals
M4-lending PNFC

2.51
3.10
2.25
8.75

1.25
1.55
1.12
4.36

0.72
0.50
-0.20
0.46

0.69
0.45
-0.17
0.41

0.64
0.38
-0.13
0.33

0.57
0.29
-0.09
0.21

0.46
0.19
-0.05
0.08

0.35
0.06
-0.02
-0.07

0.21
-0.07
0.00
-0.22

0.06
-0.21
-0.02
-0.36

-0.07
-0.35
-0.06
-0.48

GDP deflator
GDP deflator Inflation
RPI
RPI inflation
RPIX
RPIX inflation
House prices
Equity prices

2.72
3.42
3.65
2.85
3.64
2.57
8.99
13.88

1.36
1.70
1.63
1.27
1.62
1.14
4.49
6.92

0.06
0.50
-0.20
0.51
-0.35
0.42
0.58
-0.16

-0.11
0.41
-0.31
0.47
-0.45
0.35
0.59
-0.12

-0.27
0.30
-0.42
0.40
-0.54
0.26
0.58
-0.06

-0.41
0.18
-0.53
0.29
-0.62
0.13
0.54
0.02

-0.52
0.04
-0.63
0.14
-0.69
-0.02
0.44
0.13

-0.57
-0.08
-0.71
-0.02
-0.74
-0.17
0.30
0.25

-0.58
-0.16
-0.78
-0.15
-0.78
-0.29
0.13
0.35

-0.53
-0.20
-0.82
-0.26
-0.79
-0.38
-0.06
0.42

-0.45
-0.21
-0.83
-0.33
-0.78
-0.42
-0.25
0.42

Short-term interest rates
Long-term interest rates
"Yield curve"

2.10
1.08
1.67

1.05
0.54
0.83

0.64
0.33
-0.59

0.62
0.25
-0.61

0.56
0.17
-0.60

0.46
0.08
-0.52

0.30
-0.03
-0.39

0.10
-0.15
-0.23

-0.10
-0.27
-0.05

-0.28
-0.37
0.12

-0.42
-0.41
0.27

ERI
Dollar sterling

6.44
10.95

2.87
4.88

0.16
0.58

0.09
0.53

0.02
0.45

-0.07
0.35

-0.16
0.23

-0.24
0.10

-0.31
-0.01

-0.35
-0.11

-0.37
-0.20

-0.18

-0.08

0.02

0.13

0.24

0.32

0.38

0.41

0.43

Correlation M0 and investment

Table 1.b: Business fluctuations of the euro area economy (1970-2000)

Variables (t)

Std (X)

Std (X) / Std
(GDP)

Cross correlation with GDP (t+k)
-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

GDP
Consumption
Investment
Cumulated inventories

0.84
0.55
1.85
2.40

1.00
0.65
2.20
2.86

-0.19
-0.13
0.06
0.65

0.18
0.09
0.34
0.83

0.58
0.37
0.62
0.82

0.88
0.63
0.81
0.59

1.00
0.79
0.86
0.22

0.80
0.75
-0.19

0.66
0.51
-0.52

0.40
0.21
-0.70

0.09
-0.09
-0.70

GDP deflator (level)
CPI (level)
CPI (inflation)

0.58
0.68
0.31

0.70
0.81
0.37

0.29
0.28
0.35

0.27
0.26
0.34

0.16
0.16
0.27

-0.04
-0.03
0.21

-0.30
-0.26
0.20

-0.55
-0.50
0.26

-0.72
-0.66
0.31

-0.76
-0.72
0.30

-0.67
-0.66
0.19

Stock prices
Real estate prices

12.00
1.36

0.14
1.62

-0.10
0.53

-0.07
0.52

-0.01
0.50

0.05
0.45

0.08
0.39

0.06
0.31

0.01
0.20

-0.03
0.06

-0.02
-0.08

Short-term rate nominal
Short-term rate real
Long-term rate nominal
Yield curve

1.09
0.76
0.57
0.83

0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01

0.27
0.49
0.22
-0.20

0.54
0.65
0.38
-0.45

0.73
0.68
0.48
-0.63

0.76
0.55
0.47
-0.68

0.61
0.26
0.33
-0.58

0.30
-0.11
0.09
-0.34

-0.08
-0.43
-0.17
-0.01

-0.43
-0.61
-0.37
0.32

-0.67
-0.59
-0.46
0.56

Real ef. exchange rate
DM-USD exchange rate

3.58
5.23

4.27
6.22

0.22
0.13

0.33
0.36

0.36
0.56

0.30
0.61

0.17
0.48

0.01
0.22

-0.12
-0.08

-0.18
-0.34

-0.18
-0.46

M1
M3
Total loans

1.00
0.72
0.85

1.19
0.85
1.01

-0.22
0.45
0.59

-0.26
0.23
0.55

-0.20
0.01
0.48

-0.05
-0.17
0.37

0.16
-0.26
0.23

0.39
-0.27
0.10

0.58
-0.19
0.00

0.68
-0.06
-0.06

0.67
0.07
-0.08

Note: Table reproduced from Agresti and Mojon (2001).

Table 1.c: Business fluctuations of the US economy (1970-2000)

Variables (t)

Std (X)

Std (X) / Std
(GDP)

Cross correlation with GDP (t+k)
-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

GDP
Consumption
Investment
Cumulated inventories

1.34
1.01
3.26
2.35

1.00
0.75
2.44
1.76

-0.09
-0.24
0.11
0.74

0.24
0.03
0.44
0.89

0.60
0.34
0.75
0.88

0.89
0.64
0.94
0.69

1.00
0.84
0.95
0.35

0.89
0.87
0.80
-0.02

0.59
0.74
0.53
-0.32

0.23
0.51
0.20
-0.48

-0.09
0.27
-0.10
-0.48

GDP deflator (level)
CPI (level)
CPI (inflation)

0.67
1.02
1.29

0.00
0.50
0.77

0.00
0.23
0.48

-0.16
0.10
0.59

-0.31
-0.07
0.63

-0.42
-0.24
0.56

-0.48
-0.41
0.38

-0.49
-0.52
0.15

-0.46
-0.56
-0.09

-0.42
-0.54
-0.25

-0.39
-0.49
-0.31

Stock prices
Real estate prices

7.92
2.12

5.93
1.59

-0.50
-0.18

-0.50
-0.21

-0.37
-0.16

-0.12
-0.06

0.16
0.08

0.39
0.21

0.47
0.24

0.40
0.17

0.22
0.03

Short-term rate nominal
Short-term rate real
Long-term rate nominal
Yield curve

1.31
1.11
0.82
1.09

0.98
0.83
0.61
0.82

0.38
-0.11
-0.03
-0.51

0.56
-0.03
0.14
-0.60

0.68
0.07
0.28
-0.63

0.67
0.14
0.35
-0.56

0.50
0.15
0.30
-0.39

0.21
0.07
0.14
-0.15

-0.14
-0.06
-0.07
0.12

-0.44
-0.22
-0.28
0.33

-0.62
-0.36
-0.41
0.45

Real ef. exchange rate
DM-USD exchange rate

2.96
6.66

2.21
4.98

0.08
0.19

0.11
0.23

0.08
0.23

0.00
0.23

-0.07
0.27

-0.12
0.37

-0.12
0.45

-0.08
0.42

-0.01
0.27

M1
M3
Total loans

1.78
0.87
1.99

1.33
0.65
1.49

-0.22
0.25
0.75

-0.23
0.37
0.78

-0.18
0.42
0.68

-0.08
0.39
0.48

0.05
0.28
0.19

0.16
0.12
-0.11

0.22
-0.03
-0.34

0.24
-0.13
-0.45

0.22
-0.15
-0.45

Note: Table reproduced from Agresti and Mojon (2001).

Table 2: The effects of financial change

Loss
St. dev. (p), %
St. dev. (y), %
St. dev. (R), %

Financial frictions
240.4
4.19
0.99
4.91

No financial frictions
238.7
4.11
1.05
4.27

