Financial Markets and Household Consumption
Speech given by
Timothy Besley, Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England

At the Institute for Fiscal Studies, London
18 February 2008

Accompanying paper

I would like to thank Charlie Bean, Andrew Holder, Neil Meads, Sally Reid, Nicola Scott, Paolo Surico and
Garry Young for comments and assistance. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect
those of the Bank of England or other members of the Monetary Policy Committee.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Ladies and Gentlemen, thank you for coming. It is a great pleasure to be addressing
you here at the IFS with which I am proud to have had a long­standing association as
a Research Fellow. The IFS provides formidable commentaries on economic policy
issues in the UK and brings to bear the best economic analysis and evidence to issues
that it studies. When it comes to formulating policy, I am firmly of the view that
there is no substitute for a good balance of economic analysis and evidence.

Recent events are making the job of the MPC extremely challenging. As you are well
aware, the UK economy has in the past few months experienced significant shocks
with implications for both inflation and activity. Rising energy and food prices, along
with a lower exchange rate, will increase inflation in the near term. At the same time,
recent turmoil in financial markets is resulting in tighter credit conditions. This is
leading to a weaker picture for world growth which, along with its direct effect on the
UK, is posing a downside risk to growth in demand and output. Responding to either
of these events on its own would be challenging. But the combination creates extra
complications with which we are now coming to terms. Against this background, the
MPC decided on a 25bps cut in Bank rate at its meeting of February 7th. The
Inflation Report, published last Wednesday, elucidated the current best collective
judgement of the MPC and the minutes to be published next Wednesday will explain
further the thinking of the committee at its last meeting.

The shocks to the UK economy that I have just described have created a challenge to
policy. As a member of the MPC, I will be trying to judge what level of Bank Rate is
needed, in line with our mandate, to achieve the inflation target of 2% CPI inflation in
the medium term. Among other things, this will mean forming a judgement on how
conditions in financial markets are affecting the real economy.

Many commentaries on these issues offer qualitative judgements about the effect of
either shock described above on inflation and output growth. But in making monetary
policy work, it is necessary to go beyond this and to form quantitative judgements to
get a feel for the balance of risks. While we are confronted with large amounts of
data on a wide variety of indicators on an almost daily basis, the difficult job is to
analyze and process this to form a coherent view of where the economy is heading. A
key judgement is when and whether a piece of data coming from any particular source
2

contains sufficient news to challenge one’s view about the outlook for the economy.
The MPC process makes much use of economic models and quantitative analysis as a
guide to its decision making. As an academic economist, I am used to formulating
and estimating quantitative models that allow us to think about policy issues.

Today, I would like to report on some research that I have been doing with Neil
Meads and Paolo Surico who are staff members in the External MPC Unit at the Bank
of England.1 The results that I am discussing today are helping to shape my view of
how developments in financial markets are likely to affect the path of household
consumption in the next year or so.

Before turning to what we have found, it will be useful to discuss some background
issues in order to set the scene for the work that we have been doing.

The economic theory of consumption­smoothing says that consumers will wish to
manage any mismatch between their desired pattern of consumption and earnings.
For example, consumers who anticipate a rising income profile may wish to borrow
early in life (external finance) and save later in anticipation of retirement (internal
finance). Access to financial markets also allows consumers to smooth expenditures
associated with purchases of durable goods such as housing. The development of
financial markets has allowed for greater opportunities for borrowing and/or better
opportunities for saving. Over the past twenty years or so, such opportunities have
expanded and have been made available to a wider group of households.

Focusing on the past 10 years, credit conditions to households do appear to have
relaxed rather markedly. Given developments in the wider economy over this period,
this qualitative picture makes sense. The economy has been remarkably stable. The
fall in unemployment from 7.2% in 1997 to 4.7% in 2005 reduced a key risk from
lending to households. Low nominal interest rates against the backdrop of low and
stable inflation reduced carrying costs of a given loan. Greater securitization in the
market for asset­backed securities and structured credit products allowed the
possibility of greater risk sharing from a given lending portfolio. There has also been
1

See Timothy Besley, Neil Meads and Paolo Surico, “Household External Finance and Consumption”.

3

increased competition among lenders which may have driven down margins and made
credit terms more attractive to borrowers.

The consequences of relaxed credit conditions are reflected in what happened to the
price and quantity of credit over this period. This is illustrated in Charts 1 and 2. The
first shows that the quantity of both secured and unsecured debt, relative to disposable
income, increased over this period. The second shows that, for mortgages, the spread
between borrowing rates and Libor diminished, up to the summer of 2007. At the
same time, household net financial assets have largely kept pace with increasing debt
levels over the recent past (see Chart 3). Nonetheless, over this period, concerns
about the aggregate level of household indebtedness have been voiced frequently.
However, the aggregate values are probably not very helpful in assessing the full
macro­economic risks associated with these developments, which depend on the
proportion of borrowers at the riskier end of the spectrum.

The developments in financial markets that I have described were the backdrop to the
early period of my membership of the MPC. The rapid expansion of credit and
increases in a wide variety of asset prices in part underpinned my judgement that we
needed to raise rates quite quickly to lean against such developments in order to meet
the inflation target in the medium term. I claim no special prescience ­­ puzzlement at
the compression of risk premia in a variety of financial markets had been a frequent
refrain of central bankers (including the Bank of England) throughout this period.
Some re­appraisal of risk was, however, already taking place as evidenced in the fall
in the rate of growth of unsecured lending from mid 2005 onwards depicted in
Chart 4.

Since the middle of last summer, there has been a more general reappraisal of risk in
financial markets whose consequences are still working through to households and
businesses. One consequence of the disruption that this has created is that markets for
asset backed securities in the UK have all but closed. Spreads have widened, at first
to reflect a liquidity premium but latterly to reflect increased credit risk.

The Bank’s credit conditions survey for 2007Q4 confirmed that these developments
are likely to worsen the prices and quantities of credit available to households in the
4

UK.2. But it is very difficult to judge what the path of adjustment might be and what
kind of ‘normal’ market conditions will emerge in the end. But it seems like a fair
judgement that a return to the conditions seen for secured lending in the first half of
2007 is not imminent.

The period of relaxed credit conditions that I have described also saw robust
consumption growth. The flip side of this is the fairly persistent fall in the household
savings rate over this period, as shown in Chart 5. This had reached 3.4% in 2007
down from 9.4% in 1997.

Among the motives for saving is as a precautionary measure against unforeseen future
events. By substituting for precautionary savings, increased economic stability and
the ability to access credit may well have contributed to the fall in the saving ratio.
For example, flexible mortgage lending to homeowners with significant housing
equity may allow access to housing equity in times of need. Thus, there is a plausible
economic story linking credit availability and consumption growth over the period in
question.

In the research that we have been doing, we attempt to quantify how much of the
consumption growth that we have seen in the UK can be attributed to better household
access to external finance. Previous work in this area has been hampered by the
difficulty of finding a suitable measure of household access to external finance. We
follow an idea of the Oxford­based economist – John Muellbauer – who together with
his co­authors has used data from mortgage lending to creating a measure of credit
conditions.3 However, the measure that we extract from the data is rather different
from theirs.

The underlying source of data is the Survey of Mortgage Lenders, which contains
information on an average of 40,000 randomly selected borrowers per each year over
the period 1975­2005.

2

Available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/other/monetary/creditconditions.htm.
See Emilio Fernandez­Corugedo and John Muellbauer (2006). “Consumer Credit Conditions in the
UK”, Bank of England Working Paper No. 314.
3

5

Our measure of household access to external finance is created in two steps. At step
one, we look at the average relationship between the spread over Bank Rate that an
individual pays on their mortgage when they take it out. This spread can be
interpreted as a risk premium, telling us how much the lender demands as
compensation for risk in order to lend to any particular borrower. We find, consistent
with conventional wisdom, that individuals pay a smaller spread if their income is
higher and they have more collateral. We also find that regional house price
developments affect the spread with higher house prices being associated with a lower
spread, other things being equal.

Our second step is to focus in on borrowers who have ‘above average spread’
mortgage deals in the following specific sense – given their characteristics such as
age, income and collateral, they face an interest rate spread on their mortgage which is
higher than the spread faced by an individual with characteristics equal to the average
of the population of borrowers. Since ‘above average spread’ borrowers are among
those who appear riskier, their mortgage terms may be more indicative of the lender’s
willingness to tolerate risky lending than the terms of lending to average borrowers.
In fact, we take only the top 10% of borrowers on this basis and look at their spread
relative to Bank Rate. However, the main findings of the research are robust if we set
the threshold to capture the top 25%. We call this measure the Household External
Finance (HEF) index. It gives a specific quantitative measure of the terms on which
households can access the credit market over a period of 31 years.

The useful thing about having this measure is that we can ask whether the terms of
household credit access have influenced consumption growth over this period. For
this, we use data from the Family Expenditure Survey (FES), which covers a
randomly selected sample of around 7000 British households per year over a longer
period than that covered by the SML.4

The reason we use FES rather ONS consumption data is that these are data on
households and thus they allow us to look at how different cohorts of households
respond to the HEF index as well as looking at aggregate consumption. However,
4

We look specifically at data on non­durable consumption. We are particularly grateful to Andrew
Leicester from the IFS for initial help with these data.

6

today I will focus on the aggregate results and only mention the cohort level results in
passing.5

Chart 6 graphs the HEF index against aggregate FES consumption growth over the
time period. If the information contained in the HEF index is relevant to explaining
consumption growth, we should expect that when the interest rate spread is high then
credit conditions are tougher so that riskier households face higher than usual
borrowing rates and hence may find it more difficult to smooth consumption from one
year to another. The general sense that one gets from Chart 6 is that periods of credit
market tightness, as measured by high values of the HEF index, are indeed associated
with periods of weak consumption growth.

But in looking at the relationship between consumption growth and the HEF index it
would be wise to control for other factors that could be relevant in shaping
consumption growth over this period – these might include changes in income, real
interest rates and house prices. One can also use more or less sophisticated
econometric methods to study the relationship to worry about the exact specification.

The bottom line that emerges is that the HEF index does seem to play a role in
explaining household consumption alongside the more standard variables. This
relationship is highly statistically significant and robust to a wide variety of
specifications. Moreover, the effect is quantitatively important with a one standard
deviation change in the HEF index being associated, on average across households,
with a change in the annual growth rate of consumption between 0.7% and 1.5%.

A further sense of this can be gained by looking at Chart 7 which plots the component
of consumption growth not predicted from more standard variables against the HEF
index. The straight line illustrates the partial regression relationship between these
two variables which is downward sloping.

When we look at different birth cohorts, we find that these relationships are most
prevalent among younger households. However, we find little evidence that there is

5

See our paper for details.

7

any different impact of credit conditions, measured through the HEF index, on the
consumption of home owners and renters.

So what do I conclude from this and how can it be useful in shaping my assessment of
the future?

First, the work does provide a quantitative assessment of the proposition that there is a
link between availability of household external finance and the buoyancy of
consumption growth.

While the results from this work are based on historical relationships, they suggest
implications for future consumption growth. With credit conditions tightening, we
might expect a significant reduction in consumption growth over the coming months.

The following illustrative calculation gives a feel for how much of the decline in
savings that we have observed might be explained by more relaxed credit conditions.
Suppose the Libor­spread increased by 20 basis points over a year. This implies an
increase in the HEF index of 0.3, which according to a one standard error around the
estimates of column (2) in Table 2 of our paper brings about a reduction in
consumption growth between 0.7% and 1.5% per annum. If we assume that all other
variables, including income, remain equal to their historical values, then the saving
rate would be between 4.1% and 4.9% compared to the value of 3.4% observed in
2007. Thus our estimates suggest that credit conditions can be a quantitatively
significant determinant of savings.

These findings are consistent with the view that households will rebuild their savings
over the medium term. Depending on how credit market conditions stabilise, this
may have only a temporary effect on consumption growth. However, there is a great
deal of uncertainty.

The research that I have reported today is only a small part of a larger picture. There
are many aspects of the relationship between financial conditions and the real
economy, each of which needs to be assessed on its own merits in order to take a view
of how financial market conditions will act upon the economy.
8

Debates about monetary policy tend to reveal a wide variety of opinions on how much
weight should be placed on financial conditions in the monetary transmission
mechanism. My time on the MPC, before and after the events of last summer, has
reinforced my view that considerable weight should be placed on conditions in
financial markets in understanding the transmission of monetary policy to the real
economy. The MPC sets Bank Rate. But the impact that the level of Bank Rate has
on activity will depend, to some extent, on the conditions that obtain in financial
markets. Judging whether a given level of Bank Rate is restrictive depends
importantly upon the conditions that prevail in financial markets at the time.

The research that I have reported on today further reinforces this view. Our HEF
index gives a specific condition that one might look at to assess conditions in financial
markets and their likely effect on consumption growth apart from standard indicators
such as the level of interest rates and the growth of disposable income.

In conclusion, let me return to the prospects for policy in the difficult period ahead.
As a member of the MPC, I will continue to monitor all aspects of the economy
affecting inflation and output growth. Meeting the inflation target in the medium term
will continue to anchor my voting decisions. I make a month­by­month assessment of
the balance of risks created by above­target inflation in the near term against a
backdrop of softer prospects for demand and output growth. It is important in doing
so to remain forward­looking and to bring to bear the best evidence and analysis.

9

Chart 1: Household debt to income ratios

Chart 2: Change in borrowing rate spreads since 2001

Ratio of
disposable
income
Total

Secured on dwellings

Unsecured

1989

1992

1995

1998

2001

2004

Basis points

2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

SVR
5 yr fixed

­10

2 yr fixed

­30

Bank Rate Tracker

­50
­70

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Chart 4: Secured and unsecured lending growth

Per cent
6

Percentage changes oya

5
Total financial
assets

4
Secured

8

1

Unsecured

0
1995

1998

2001

2004

12

Total

2

Net financial wealth

1992

20

16

3

1989

30
10

2007

Chart 3: Financial and housing wealth to income
ratios

50

2007

4
2001

10

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Chart 5: Household saving to income ratio

Chart 6: HEF index and aggregate FES consumption
growth

Per cent
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1992

1995

1998

2001

2004

2007

Chart 7: Contribution of HEF index to aggregate FES consumption growth

Unexplained Consumption growth
­4
­2
0
2

1989

.5

1

1.5

2

HEF index
Unexplained Consumption growth

11

Fitted values

