Financial institutions supervision and culture
Remarks given by
James Proudman, Executive Director UK Deposit Takers Supervision

Panel Discussion at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York Conference on
‘Reforming Culture and Behaviour in the Financial Services Industry’
20 October 2016

I would like to thank Richard Bennett for his invaluable contribution to preparing these
remarks
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Thank you very much for inviting me to take part in today's panel. It is a privilege to be here today at the
New York Fed, and it is a privilege to be joining Kevin and my distinguished panellists to discuss the
important topic of the role of culture in financial institutions supervision.
I’d like to begin by outlining why culture matters for banking supervisors such as myself. The key point is that
the way in which decisions about risk are taken within firms – the “who, where and how” – clearly matter
significantly to prudential supervisors. Past financial crises demonstrate that banks have been undermined
by the excessively risky decisions that they had taken, sometimes years previously.
A firm’s culture – the set of social norms that guide patterns of behaviour – clearly can affect decision
making. Responsibility for culture has to rest squarely with firms themselves. A firm’s culture is hard to
describe precisely or pin-down, and evolves over time. And it is extremely hard, if not impossible, to either
prescribe or supervise. Andrew Bailey, the former CEO of the PRA and now CEO of the FCA, summed it up
nicely in his May 2016 speech when he said that a supervisor cannot ask a firm to “show us your
culture”. But we can sometimes recognise a poor culture when we see it - whether it emanates from the
‘tone from the top’ or in the tell-tale signs, such as the behaviours that employees see rewarded in their
bosses.

We strongly support industry initiatives which seek to build good practice. One such industry initiative is the
work done in the UK by the Banking Standards Board (BSB) - as described by Baroness O’Neil earlier today,
and Alison Cottrell, the CEO of the BSB later on this afternoon - which seeks to promote high professional
and ethical standards in the banking industry. This and other industry efforts underscore the potential for
professional bodies to play a role in raising levels of competence and ethical behaviour. In parallel with
initiatives to improve culture within firms, there have been recent initiatives to strengthen market integrity.
These initiatives recognise that firms cannot exist in isolation of the markets in which they operate, and
neither can their culture be entirely insulated from developments elsewhere.

While responsibility for culture rests with firms, what regulation can do is provide a framework to improve
decision making; I want to highlight two initiatives that have been central to our approach at the Prudential
Regulation Authority and that we are now implementing; on individual and collective responsibility – the “who
and where” – and on incentives – the “how” decisions are taken.

One lesson of the recent financial crisis was that, too often, senior staff in failing banks were able, either at
the time or in retrospect, to deny responsibility for decisions taken within the firm. There was no answer to
the question “who’s in charge?”. Ensuring there is a clear and transparent answer to this question has been
a priority of the prudential reform agenda in the UK.

2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2

The new Senior Managers Regime (SMR) came into force on 7 March and is aimed at clearly allocating
responsibilities to individuals. The focus of the regime is on the small handful of most senior
decision-makers, including executive and some non-executive directors. We require firms to set out for us
simply and clearly - and not using a dictionary of legalese – what their responsibilities are, so that the PRA
and FCA know, in advance of any problem arising, that responsibilities for the key activities of a firm are
allocated to a senior individual. Senior Managers are subject to a statutory duty of responsibility that allows
the PRA and FCA to hold them to account for misconduct if a regulatory breach takes place and it can be
demonstrated that they failed to take reasonable steps to prevent or stop it. But while this statutory duty
provides a robust enforcement tool, as a supervisor, I primarily view the regime as a vehicle for promoting
better decision making, and as a tool for supporting day-to-day supervision.

On 28 September, the PRA also introduced a series of requirements for regulated firms to provide
employment references to one another in a mandatory template when hiring Senior Managers. The template
includes information relating to the individual’s conduct record, and fitness and propriety, and seeks to
prevent the ‘recycling’ of individuals with poor conduct records throughout the industry, as has happened in
the past.

One of the challenges we have received from firms is that the emphasis in the SMR on the individual
undermines collective responsibility and governance. I do not agree with this view. Individual accountability
and collective decision making are compatible and complementary. Collective decisions do not arise in a
vacuum but are the product of a range of individual contributions.

Alongside the Senior Managers Regime, we have spelled out more clearly what we expect of board
members collectively. Our guidance, for example, addresses issues such as the optimal number of
independent directors, underscores the importance of appropriate succession planning and sets out our
expectations for the local governance of significant subsidiaries. And we evaluate firms’ corporate
governance through periodic supervisory reviews, either in the form of full reviews or simpler case studies.
Our focus is on both the design and, even more importantly, the effectiveness of the firm’s arrangements,
including how firm culture is created, embedded and overseen.

For firms where we consider governance to be weak, we have the ability to apply additional capital to cover
the financial risks generated by that weakness. In order to create the right incentives to fix problems, our
approach is to outline clear and measurable actions that, once we are content they have been sufficiently
remedied by the firm, result in the removal of the capital charge.

Taken together, the reforms that we have undertaken with respect to both individual and collective
responsibility are aimed at creating a regime in which the senior management of firms are now “on the hook”
for the decisions taken within the firm: both the key strategic decision taken at senior management level, and
the framework of delegations and decision-taking that cascades through the organisation.
3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

3

Ensuring clear accountability has been a necessary step, but is not sufficient. “How” decisions are taken
matter too. People respond to incentives, and inappropriate financial reward mechanisms have, throughout
history, created incentives for inappropriate behaviour in banks. Remuneration policy is a key lever to
strengthen the alignment between risk and reward. Enhancing EU remuneration requirements within our
own rules, the PRA has introduced a longer deferral regime, in which a large proportion of the variable
remuneration of those subject to the Senior Managers Regime now has to be deferred for seven years. We
have strengthened our expectations of firms’ ability to withhold the payment of unvested deferred
remuneration (‘malus’) and retrieval of variable remuneration that has already been paid (‘clawback’). We
now have clawback rules which can bite for up to ten years from the date of award. And we have recently
published rules that will enable malus and clawback to be applied to bought out awards, which should help to
close the loophole whereby “rolling bad apples” move between firms to avoid the consequences of their
actions.

We also strongly support the work of the Financial Stability Board to address compensation and misconduct
– a consistent and coordinated approach across the G20 is essential if there is to be real change. The new
guidance that the FSB will develop for firms and supervisors will be important in securing this consistency.

So, what are we finding in terms of industry trends? As with any significant regulatory change, the
implementation of the Senior Managers Regime generated extensive debate. Ahead of its introduction,
there were considerable industry concerns about the potential unintended consequences of the regime on
areas such as board dynamics and the ability of firms to attract and retain talent, and about the enforcement
regime.

The regime has only been in force for a little over half a year, so it is too early to make definitive statements
about its effects. We are now however starting to see signs that some of the intended effects are beginning
to emerge, while we have not seen the more dire warnings crystallising. Feedback we have received
suggests that greater clarity around the responsibilities of key executives is helping to facilitate effective
challenge by independent non-executive directors. We have also heard that the greater clarity has
sharpened focus on governance structure and policy ownership. And we have picked up that there is
heightened attention by firms on conducting appropriate due diligence on prospective candidates. In short,
the early signs are promising. In due course, the PRA will be developing a framework for the evaluation of
whether our initiatives on accountability and incentives are meeting their objectives, including their impact on
firms’ cultures and, if appropriate, will consider possible optimisations.

The final aspect I would like to cover is how this focus on the industry is reflected within the Bank of England.
As a central bank and a regulator, we consider it important to hold ourselves to comparable standards to
those we require from regulated firms.

4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

4

Since March, the Bank of England, including the PRA, has been applying the Senior Managers Regime to its
own senior decision-makers. Each member of the Bank of England’s senior leadership team, myself
included, is covered, and the associated statements of responsibility are available to view on the Bank’s
website. Consistent with what we expect from the firms we supervise, these ensure that overall
responsibility for each of the Bank’s activities, business areas and management functions are allocated to a
Senior Manager. We also plan to adopt enhanced employment reference requirements similar to those that
will apply to PRA-regulated firms.

5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

5

