Forecasting future banknote demand
Remarks given by
Victoria Cleland, Chief Cashier

Future of Cash Conference 2017, Vienna
5 October 2017

I would like to thank Ellen Caswell for her help in preparing this speech.

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

Less than a month ago, on 14 September 2017, the Bank of England launched a new polymer £10 note
featuring the inspirational author Jane Austen. Since then the 1 billion notes produced for launch have been
making their way around the country, and by 22 September 158 million notes were already in circulation.
This has only been possible due to the fantastic innovation, planning and engagement of the cash industry,
to whom I am most grateful.
The launch, which included a range of social media – from twitter to snapchat – alongside the more
traditional methods of communication, received good coverage and generated a number of
questions. These included: “For how long can the paper £10s continue to be spent?”; “Did the Bank know
the quote was ironic?”; “Why are you issuing new notes when cash is in decline?” The first 2 are easy to
answer: until spring 2018, with at least 3 months’ notice before withdrawal; and yes, as well as working in
isolation, the quote demonstrated Jane Austen’s wit and insights. On one level the third question is also
easy – cash is not in decline. But it is a complicated story, with as many twists as Jane Austen's own novels,
and one which I would like to explore today.

As with any good book, I will start by setting the scene. We are in a world where there is an ever growing
range of alternatives to cash, taking hold with varying degrees of success. Very notable in the UK is the rise
1

in the use of contactless cards, which tripled in 2016 accounting for 7% of payments. The shift in consumer
preferences is also evident in online spending, where average weekly online shopping in the UK was
2

£1.1 billion in August 2017; an increase of 16% compared with August 2016. Such developments have led
many commentators to predict the demise of cash.

But the numbers show a different story. In 2016 the value of Bank of England notes in circulation increased
by 10%, reaching over £70 billion in the run-up to Christmas: the fastest growth in a decade. Cash remains
the most widely used payment method in the UK. It accounted for 40% of all payments and 44% of
3

payments made by consumers in 2016. Cash is still the preferred payment method for many: in a recent
international survey by ING, 79% of people in the UK said they would never go completely cashless, similar
to the European average of 76%.

4

A puzzle. Perhaps it is turning into a detective story. At the heart of solving it is understanding why people
use cash. There are many different drivers, and these drivers are different for different people and at
different times. For consumers, a key benefit of cash is its tangibility. It can be a useful budgeting tool, and
it is a quick and easy payment method which works even when, for example, card terminals do not. Indeed,
cash is relied on by some and valued by many: 2.7 million people in the UK rely almost entirely on cash
transactions – a number that has increased by 0.5 million since 2015.

5

1

Payments UK (2017a)
Office for National Statistics (2017)
3
Payments UK (2017b)
4
ING (2017)
5
Payments UK (2017b) and Payments UK (2016)
2

2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

2

Some people choose to hold cash as a store of value: a 2014 survey commissioned for the Bank of England
estimated that 18% of people hoard cash, the primary reason being to provide comfort against potential
6

emergencies. In addition there is a strong overseas demand, for example from tourists and expats.

For retailers, cash is still the cheapest method to accept. According to the British Retail Consortium, in 2016
the average cash transaction cost a retailer 0.15% measured as a percentage of turnover, compared to
0.31% across all payment types.

7

As a central bank, as with most businesses, it is important for us to understand what motivates demand for
our product and crucially how this might change. Econometric modelling provides a helpful starting point.
We have developed a model that estimates a long run relationship between the level of notes in circulation
and the drivers of demand that, when tested, proved to be statistically significant. Such drivers included
nominal consumption, interest rates and exchange rates. We estimate, for example, that a 1% rise in
8

consumption led to a slightly less than 1% rise in cash demand. A 1% depreciation in the sterling exchange
rate was found to increase cash demand by 0.09%; the increase in demand for cash immediately following
the results of the EU referendum was consistent with this finding. And unsurprisingly, higher interest rates
reduce the demand for cash as the opportunity cost of holding it rises. Our model suggested, for instance,
that a 100 basis point increase in Bank Rate would reduce cash demand by 2%, with the clearest effects
seen by the £20 and £50 notes.

Industry structure, such as the number of ATMs and local recycling machines, also has an influence. A fall in
the number of ATMs per person reduces demand for cash. This might reflect the fact that the banking sector
would need less cash to stock them, or that consumers withdraw less cash because there are fewer ATMs
nearby. This may seem unintuitive - one might expect fewer ATMs to actually encourage consumers to
withdraw larger stocks of cash each time they do use a cash machine. Consideration of industry structure is
particularly pertinent to the UK, which has a relatively high number of ATMs (70,020 in 2016).

9

The model provides a good basis for our analysis, but we need to augment it with qualitative information and
views on the changing environment. Are there, for example, any major events, such as note launches or the
London Olympics, which might alter demand either temporarily or structurally? Changing consumer
preferences and commercial cash infrastructure decisions are also relevant.

Technological change also impacts the patterns of cash use. For example, there is an ever increasing range
of different ways to pay, that are accepted in ever more places, and for ever smaller values. Some central
banks are considering the merits of introducing their own digital currencies. For the Bank of England this is a

6

Fish, T. and Whymark, R. (2015)
British Retail Consortium (2016)
Miller, C. (2017)
9
Payments UK (2017b)
7
8

3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

3

long term research project, and is certainly not an imminent initiative. An interesting area is charitable giving,
where for many years cash has remained crucial. But that could be changing. For example, the
Church of England recently announced plans to digitise its collection plates by installing contactless
terminals in churches. And ATMs are providing users with the opportunity to give to charity at the same time
as withdrawing money.

That said, payment innovation can increase cash demand as well as reduce it. M-Pesa, the popular mobile
money development in Africa, has not reduced the demand for cash per se as users deposit cash into an
account stored on their mobile phone. And cash can have a role in internet shopping too. The recently
launched Amazon Top Up allows users to deposit cash into their Amazon account at participating retailers.
There are also apps such as Shpock and Gumtree which allow buyers and sellers to agree on a price and
then meet to make the transaction, enabling the buyer to check the condition of the item and for cash to be
used. A lot of the resilience of cash to date is down to the work of the wider industry to adapt their models to
meet customer demands.

JMW Turner, the ground breaking artist who will feature on the Bank of England's forthcoming polymer £20
note, reportedly said that ‘it is only when we are no longer fearful that we begin to create’. This illustrates the
premium of identifying issues upfront and acting when there is time to proactively shape the structure and
arrangements that are desirable to meet efficiently and effectively the public's demand for cash long term.

Central banks and the cash industry need to continue to look to the future for early indicators of change and
to work through the possibilities. This involves considering how much cash is used, and the availability of
attractive alternatives. It also requires understanding of how cash is used. For example, a rise in local
recycling where retailers replenish note-dispensing machines using notes that have been spent by
customers at the checkout could impact on the rate at which notes are processed by the wholesale sector.
There are also changes which might be triggered by the cash industry itself, such as altering the relative cost
to retailers of cash compared with other payment types.

We know that there are many alternatives to cash and with time more people will probably move to them.
But the rate of change is uncertain, and depends in part on how effectively the cash industry is able to
innovate, to maximise efficiencies, and to keep the cost of cash competitive in an environment of declining
transactional volumes. There are some big issues to address: ascertaining the level of demand that would
necessitate a significant change in the cash centre footprint; identifying whether there are more innovative
approaches to wholesale cash circulation; understanding whether greater cooperation – such as that seen in
the UK with increasing numbers of the high-street bank's customers being able to access personal and
business banking services in Post Office branches – could increase efficiencies in cash distribution; and
considering how different the landscape would be if cash demand plummeted but everyone wanted to be
able to rely on it in a business continuity scenario. The cash industry should embrace technology to help
develop an infrastructure that is flexible and scalable. There needs to be capacity, for instance, to deal with
4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

4

the logistics of note launches: something that is especially pertinent for the new £20, with £20s representing
around two-thirds of notes in circulation.

Cash continues to play a key role for many, and a crucial role for some. It is important that we, as a central
bank, and the wider cash industry continue to fulfil our responsibilities to ensure that genuine, good quality
notes are available to meet public demand. Flexibility is important, as is efficiency, competition and business
continuity. These factors are drivers that led to the Bank’s announcement today that, following a competitive
tender, the Bank has entered into 10 year contracts with both CCL Secure Limited and De La Rue to supply
the polymer substrate for the next £20 banknote. The new Turner £20 note will be issued in 2020, and I look
forward to working with the cash industry again to deliver this change: the next new chapter for cash.

5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

5

References
British Retail Consortium (2016), ‘Payments Survey 2016’, available at
https://brc.org.uk/media/179489/payment-survey-2016_final.pdf
Fish, T. and Whymark, R. (2015), ‘How has Cash Usage Evolved in Recent Decades? What Might Drive
Demand in the Future?’, Quarterly Bulletin, Bank of England.
ING (2017), ‘ING International Survey: Mobile Banking 2017 Cashless Society April 2017’
https://www.ezonomics.com/ing_international_surveys/mobile-banking-2017-cashless-society/
Miller, C. (2017), ‘Addressing the Limitations of Forecasting Banknote Demand’, available at
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/banknotes/Documents/about/bundesbankpaper.pdf
Office for National Statistics (2017), ‘Statistical Bulletin: Retail Sales in Great Britain: August 2017’,
available at https://www.ons.gov.uk/businessindustryandtrade/retailindustry/bulletins/retailsales/august2017
Payments UK (2016), ‘UK Cash & Cash Machines Summary’, available at
https://www.paymentsuk.org.uk/industry-information/annual-statistical-publications
Payments UK (2017a), ‘UK Payment Markets Summary’, available at
https://www.paymentsuk.org.uk/industry-information/annual-statistical-publications
Payments UK (2017b), ‘‘UK Cash & Cash Machines 2017 Summary’, available at
https://www.paymentsuk.org.uk/industry-information/annual-statistical-publications

6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

6

