From retailers’ paradise to shoppers’ strike: what lies behind
the weakness in consumption?
Dean’s lecture given by
Martin Weale, External Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England

At Cass Business School, London
Wednesday 29 February 2012

I would like to thank Matthew Corder, Robert Gilhooly and Tomasz Wieladek for research assistance, and to Justin Van de Ven
for his advice on use of the National Institute Tax and Benefit model. I am also grateful for helpful comments from other
colleagues. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of England or other members of
the Monetary Policy Committee.

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

Introduction

Thank you very much for the kind invitation to give this Dean’s Lecture at the Sir John Cass Business
School. Sir John Cass was of course a great philanthropist. His will was contested in the Court of Chancery
but the dispute seems to have fared better than the later case of Jarndyce versus Jarndyce described by
Charles Dickens because the modern foundation which bears his name supports a number of educational
establishments including this School. The establishment of a foundation inevitably reflects the importance its
founder attaches to future rather than current needs; neglect of future needs and future risks is a recipe for
economic disaster. But today I would like to look at the other side of that coin – consumption. Although the
most recent GDP and retail sales figures point to some improvement, one of the features of the recent period
of recession and stagnation has been weakness in consumption – quite a change from the years before the
crisis.

Household consumption (at a little over 60% of GDP) is much the largest component of total expenditure
and, as a result, even though it is less volatile than investment, fluctuations in consumption have an
important effect on overall GDP. Economic theory suggests that consumption is strongly influenced by
people’s expectations of future incomes as well as being affected by current income. This means that
fluctuations in consumption can be regarded as indicative of expected future movements in income; weak
consumption may be an indicator of persistent weakness in income. It is therefore important that the MPC
understands the drivers of consumption if it is to assess the outlook for demand and inflation.

In this speech I will outline the scale of the fall in consumption since the start of the crisis and identify some
of the factors lying behind it. The fall in people’s incomes since the early 2008 explains much of the decline
in consumption. But I will also outline how analysis that takes account of the different shocks faced by
different people or the way that they are affected differently by the same shocks (such as the adverse labour
market conditions faced by young adults since the crisis, the effect of changing state pension ages, and the
increased risk of unemployment) may also contribute to an understanding of aggregate consumption. I will
conclude with some thoughts on how this feeds in to my overall thinking on monetary policy.

If consumption is an indicator of future income, then recent data may point to further weakness in income to
come. At the end of last year, real disposable income per person had fallen by 5 per cent from its peak in
late 2007, and by around 15 per cent relative to its long-run linear trend (Chart 1). But consumption per
head has fallen even more than income. Real consumption per capita in the second half of 2011 was over
8 per cent below its 2007 peak, and over 18 per cent below its pre-crisis trend (Chart 2).

2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

2

Chart 1: Real income per capita since 2008

Chart 2: Real consumption per capita since
2008

Real income relative to peak

Real consumption relative to peak

Real income relative to pre-crisis trend

Real consumption relative to trend
Per cent
0

Percentage points
5
0

-5

-5
-10
-10
-15

-15
-20
2008

2009

2010

2011

Sources: OBR, ONS and Bank calculations.

-20
2008

2009

2010

2011

Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.

In very broad terms there is considerable consensus among economists about influences on consumption.
There is quite good evidence that the majority of income accrues to people who plan their spending with a
view to the future as well as to the present – that they seek to smooth out the effects of fluctuations in
income. Modigliani and Brumberg (1954) developed the life-cycle hypothesis, which, in essence, assumes
that people plan their consumption over their lives in much the same way as they allocate their consumption
between different types of good at any point in time. This leads to the conclusion that short-term fluctuations
in income have little effect on consumption while those changes which are expected to be permanent have a
powerful effect.

But within this general framework there is plenty of debate. What happens if risk increases? How is
consumption behaviour affected by the support offered by the state benefit and pension system? What
might the role of fluctuations in credit availability be in influencing consumption? While one might hope to
have a sophisticated framework capable of explaining fully the effects of the major influences on
consumption I do not think applied economics has yet reached the point where that is possible. In particular,
notwithstanding recent progress (e.g. Waldron and Zampoli, 2010, Attanasio, Leicester and Wakefield,
2011), there is as yet no fully-coherent and convincing analysis of the interaction between house purchase,
mortgage credit and consumption. Nevertheless, what I can do in this talk is to air a number of factors
relevant to consumption analysis and quantify the influence of some of these.

Consumer Spending and Monetary Policy

Monetary policy is effective, in part because of its impact on consumer demand. As you know, the Bank
Rate was reduced from a level of 5 per cent in the summer of 2008 to the level of ½ per cent today. Rates
3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

3

faced by households have not fallen to the same extent, but average rates paid on deposits have dropped by
around two percentage points and those charged on mortgages have fallen by 2½ percentage points. We
have, of course, also undertaken two asset purchase programmes. The first started in 2009 and finished in
January 2010. The second started in October of last year and was extended earlier this month.

As I noted in my introduction, there is broad consensus

Chart 3: Household savings ratio

that the majority of consumers plan their spending with
regard to future as well as current income. Provided

Per cent
10

Actual
Average 1989-2007

people can form a sensible expectation of the resources

8

available to them over their life-times, they can then
choose the consumption plan which gives the highest

6

possible level of welfare over their remaining expected
life-time while at the same time deciding on any legacies

4

they would like to leave. This leads to the conclusion
2

that they save when income is temporarily high and
borrow or reduce their savings when income is
temporarily low. In this framework consumption growth
depends on the real interest rate. Low interest rates

0
2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

Source: ONS

reduce the incentives to save and encourage consumers
to consume more now at the cost of consuming less in the future. So current consumption is raised but
future growth rates of consumption are reduced. This is one of the important channels by which monetary
policy affects economic activity and thus inflation.1

The Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) expects real income per capita to be almost 20 per cent below
pre-crisis trend by 2017. After a large adverse shock to expected future income, consumption should fall to
ensure, over time, income can pay for expenditure. As Chart 2 shows, consumption fell in 2008. But, if
consumers had foreseen the full impact of the financial crisis and rising commodity prices on their future
income, then, without any policy change or expectation of a rapid return to normality, consumption would
initially have fallen even more sharply than it actually did, and the savings rate would have temporarily risen
even more abruptly. This extra saving would of course, have added to wealth, so that the eventual fall in
disposable income would have been lower than that indicated. But the wealth offset would have been
relatively small. If the full effect of the crisis on income had been foreseen at the time, then this simple
analysis would have suggested that consumption should have fallen by a proportion not much smaller than
the eventual fall in income.

In fact the adjustment has been relatively gradual as Chart 2 shows. There are a number of possible
explanations. First of all, it has only become clear gradually just how large the adverse shock to incomes
1

For more on the transmission mechanism of monetary policy see:
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/other/monetary/montrans.pdf.
4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

4

has been since the financial crisis. Secondly, people may adjust their spending more slowly than the
framework I described suggests, because they like to follow their habits - an issue originally raised by
Stone and Rowe (1958) - or perhaps simply because they try to keep up appearances (Abel, 1990). But
thirdly, the Monetary Policy Committee has acted to support output so that inflation did not undershoot the
Bank’s target of 2 per cent. By rapidly cutting Bank Rate, the MPC encouraged consumers to replace future
consumption by spending now.

A simple back of the envelope calculation can show what might have happened, had consumers anticipated
the path actually followed by household real interest rates since the crisis and were those rates in future to
move in line with market expectations up to 2015 Q1 but return to pre-crisis levels at the end of 2018.2 Then
consumption would have been supported initially by at least four percentage points compared with what
might have happened in the absence of a policy relaxation. Indeed, consumption is now at a position broadly
consistent with market expectations of the interest rate and the income projections I described above. At
least this is the case if I expect the savings ratio to settle at the average of 1989 to 2007 which is just under
7 per cent. But these calculations are based on the assumption that the influence of the interest rate on
consumption is that identified by van de Ven (2011);3 this effect is lower than some other estimates have
suggested. So perhaps consumption is on the low side of what might be expected. Of course this is also
true if consumption is based on expectations of future income more favourable than those projected by the
OBR.

On top of this, of course our policy of asset purchases has provided support to consumption through its
effects on asset values, and in particular by providing some support for prices of financial assets and
property. The analysis I have described gives less role to spending out of wealth than some empirical
evidence suggests. (See e.g. Barrell and Davis, 2007, Campbell and Cocco, 2007, but for a contrary view
see Attanasio, Blow, Hamilton and Leicester, 2009. Lettau and Ludvigson,2004, argue that there is little
spending out of transitory fluctuations in wealth but substantial spending out of so-called permanent wealth.)
But I would like to explore some of the factors which may be weighing down on consumption before returning
briefly to the issue of housing and wealth.

Age Effects

The framework that I have described assumes that all consumers are alike. In practice, the differences
between them might have important consequences at the aggregate level. So the first issue I would like to
investigate is how far people of different ages have had different experiences recently. To study
consumption at the disaggregated level it is necessary to rely on the data contained in the Living Costs and
2

The market yield curve suggests that real rates are expected to remain appreciably lower than before the crisis almost indefinitely. But
the same effect (Deaton, 1992) can be achieved with the assumption that there has been an increase in the perceived uncertainty of
consumption, so that, risk adjusted, normal rates of consumption growth are resumed then. Without such a risk premium the
relationship between consumption levels and the market yield curve is very difficult to explain.
3
The assumed inter-temporal elasticity of substitution is 0.34.
5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

5

Food Survey (LCF) and its predecessors (the Expenditure and Food Survey and the Family Expenditure
Survey), while the Labour Force Survey tells us what has been happening to people’s wages.

In Chart 4 I show the growth in the real wages of people in full-time paid employment. We can see a very
clear picture from this. Before the crisis, the growth in wages of young adults was slower than that of old
workers. But since the crisis this differential has become much more marked with real wages of young
adults falling markedly more than those of people close to retirement. To the extent that these movements
lead to similar changes in expected life-time wage income, this amplifies the impact of weak incomes on
consumption compared with a situation where the weakness in wages affected people of different ages
similarly.

At the same time, of course, we know that the unemployment rate of people aged 18-24 has risen from
12 per cent in early 2008 to around 20 per cent nowadays. For those aged twenty-five to thirty-four the
unemployment rate has risen from 4½ per cent to around 8.3 per cent while for the whole population the
increase has been from 5.2 per cent to 8.4 per cent.

It is possible, of course, that these two observations are inter-connected. Wages of young adults may be
particularly depressed because there is a disproportionate number of them looking for work. It might be
hoped that the high unemployment rate has little impact on future earning potential and also that, as labour
market conditions improve, so the wages of young adults pick up. But research by Gregg and
Tominey (2005) and Arulampalam (2001) suggests that unemployment when young may have a persistent
effect on wages ten and twenty year later, particularly if the duration of unemployment is long (Gregory and
Jukes, 2001). This suggests that the overall wage outlook for young people may be even worse than would
be suggested if the effects shown in Chart 4 simply persisted. It is certainly the case that the past few years
have not been kind to young adults.

If I look at consumption as measured by the LCF and allocate household consumption across individuals I
also find that the consumption of young people has been weak relative to that of old people (Chart 5). One
might also speculate that the rapid growth in consumption of people over fifty between 2003 and 2007 was
influenced by the house price boom at that time (Attanasio, Leicester and Wakefield, 2011). And high asset
prices may have continued to support the consumption of people aged sixty-five and over since 2007.

Why might issues of this type matter even if we are concerned only with aggregate consumption? Young
people have not had much opportunity to build up wealth, so their consumption will depend mainly on
expectations of future labour income. Old people, close to or after retirement will, by contrast, expect to
finance most of their subsequent consumption out of accrued wealth (including pension rights and
entitlements to state pensions and other benefits) and will not find themselves nearly so much affected by
adverse movements in either wage rates or employment opportunities. Indeed simulation of a simple
life-cycle model suggests that this differential effect could augment the impact of the squeeze in real wages
6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

6

on consumption by about one percentage point as compared to a situation where the same average fall in
real wages had been spread uniformly across people of all ages.

Chart 4: Average annual real gross wages
growth rates(a) by age group
Per cent
3

Chart 5: Average annual real consumption
growth rates by age group
Per cent
6

2003 - 2007

2007 - 2011 Q3

2003 - 2007

2

4

1

2

0

0

-1

-2

-2

-4

2007 - 2010

-6

-3
21-30

31-40

41-50

Sources: LFS and Bank calculations.

51-65

21-30

31-40

41-50

51-64

65+

Sources: LCF, EFS, FES and Bank calculations.

(a) Individuals in full time employment.

A Structural Analysis of Disturbances to Consumption

The standard modelling tool used in central banks relies on the assumption that there are representative
consumers. In its simplest form it is assumed that there is a single individual whose spending decisions
represent the choices of all the families in the economy. These models can be extended to address the
possibility that a constant proportion of income accrues to households who spend their income as it comes
in. But, beyond this there is a range of factors which they cannot address.

One influence on saving missing from standard models is uncertainty. Economists from Keynes (1930)
onwards have drawn attention to the precautionary motive for saving; people save to provide some
protection from the vagaries of the future; if there has been any increase in the perception of uncertainty,
then saving is likely to increase. As I noted in footnote 2, it has much the same effect as an increase in the
interest rate. Could an increase in uncertainty be a factor depressing consumption relative to income and if
so might it have further to run?

A second point is that a model based round a representative consumer cannot represent what I suggested
earlier might be the main long-term motive behind saving, saving for retirement. We know that there have
been a number of changes to the social security system announced over the last few years, of which
increases in the state pension age have been perhaps the most prominent. That is likely to affect saving
behaviour, and also labour supply, but a representative agent model can hardly be expected to show this.
7

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

7

A third influence I would like to say something about is the effect of the availability of credit. On the face of it
a growing economy in which people cannot borrow is likely to have more saving than one in which borrowing
is possible. Consumption has to wait until people have the money to pay for it and that means it comes later
than if credit is available. But the effect of credit availability is not totally disconnected from the impact of
uncertainty. In a world in which credit is available, people whose incomes are unexpectedly, but, they
believe, temporarily, low, can address the problem by borrowing. In the absence of credit they can smooth
out the effects of such disturbances only by drawing on past saving. So the magnitude of the precautionary
motive is also likely to be affected by the readiness and the terms on which people expect credit to be
available.

Deaton (1992) was the first to succeed in developing a useable model of the behaviour of consumers whose
consumption differs because of their circumstances, but not their preferences. Since then a wide variety of
authors has developed his approach and, as computers have speeded up, so the richness of the models has
increased. The underlying assumption behind them is that people plan their consumption and their labour
supply so as to maximise the level of welfare they can expect to enjoy for the rest of their lives. These
decisions are made taking account of the fact that the future is uncertain; incomes can be forecast only
imprecisely and people cannot predict the date of their death.

Such a model has been developed by my colleagues at the National Institute (van de Ven, 2011) primarily
with the purpose of looking at the impacts of taxes and benefits on people’s behaviour (Sefton, Weale and
van de Ven, 2008, Sefton and van de Ven 2009). At present there are many obstacles to the use of such
models as part of a suite of tools for regular forecasting and analysis. The results are obviously dependent
on the parameters of the model, a feature which cannot be avoided, and an exploration of the sensitivity of
the findings to key parameters would itself be a very substantial exercise. But they do allow us to look at
some of the macro-economic issues I raised above, at least to some extent.

Risk, Unemployment and Saving

The future is self-evidently uncertain. A large risk that people face is that they will find themselves
unemployed and the magnitude of this risk is likely to affect people’s saving behaviour. Simulation of
household behaviour can take account of this, by imposing an exogenous probability that people simply
cannot find work. An economy in which this probability is high can then be compared with one in which it is
low, and the difference between the two can be used to estimate the effect of an unexpected permanent
increase in unemployment risk on saving behaviour.

In broad terms an increased risk of unemployment should be expected to have two main effects. First of all
average incomes will be lower, simply because fewer people on average will be working. This will reduce
saving in absolute terms. Saving as a proportion of income may also appear reduced because, in the partial
8

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

8

analysis I present, state retirement benefits are assumed to remain unchanged. Thus the need for pension
saving declines more than in proportion to the decline in labour income.

Offsetting this, in an economy with a higher probability of not being able to find a job, people will want higher
savings, so as to have an increased buffer should they be unemployed. Young people will be
disproportionately affected in the way. People near the end of their working lives may come to the
conclusion that the buffer they have built up can now be run down a bit. So in a steady state economy with
high unemployment, young people may save more than they otherwise would, while people late in working
life may save less than they otherwise would.

These effects can be seen if we compare a base economy with one in which the risk of not being able to find
a job is increased by three percentage points. Total employment income is reduced to nearly the same
extent although the buffering arising from the tax and benefit system means that disposable income is
reduced by less. Non-pension wealth is increased but total wealth declines.

But a comparison of two different economies does not tell us about the short-term impact of an increase in
unemployment which is believed to be permanent. People who have saved in the expectation of a low
unemployment risk and then find themselves facing a high unemployment risk which they expect to persist
for the rest of their working lives will react differently from those who have always lived with a high
unemployment risk. And the impact is bound to depend on whether they are close to retirement or have just
started working.

In Chart 6 I show the aftermath of a three percentage point unemployment shock on saving at different ages.
The apparently erratic movements are a consequence of the solution method, which always involves a
compromise between precision and computing time. But the lines do allow us to tell a clear story. Young
people would like to consumer more than their income and therefore do not raise their saving in response to
an increase in unemployment risk by very much. They anticipate that they will be less constrained by the
time the reach their mid-thirties and trade off some of the desired protection in the buffer offered by extra
saving until then. This is also true, to some extent, if thirty-year olds are affected by the shock. But forty and
fifty-year olds react sharply to the extra risk that they face; the impact on their saving is at a maximum in the
immediate aftermath of the shock.

Late in working life, we can, as predicted, see that people feel they now have less need of precautionary
balances, and saving falls below where it would have been in the absence of the shock to unemployment.
Beyond about seventy, however, saving seems to increase again. This reflects the fact that, in the aftermath
of the shock, people plan for lower retirement consumption than they would have chosen in its absence. As
a consequence the decumulation of wealth is slowed and this naturally enough appears as an increase in
net saving.

9

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

9

Chart 7: Effects of Unemployment on Savings(a)

Chart 6: Effects on Savings Profiles of a
Permanent Increase in Unemployment(a)

Change in Savings Rate relative to 2007
Change in Unemployment Rate relative to 2007

Percentage points
3

Age at time of shock:
20
30

40

50

Percentage points
3.5

60

2

3.0
1

2.5
2.0

0
1.5
1.0

-1

0.5
-2
20

30

40

50
60
Age

70

80

90

Source: National Institute Benefit & Tax Model .
(a) The graph shows the change in saving measured as a
proportion of disposable income in the absence of a shock to
unemployment.

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

0.0
2013

Source: National Institute Benefit & Tax Model and OBR.
(a) The graph shows the change in saving measured as a
proportion of disposable income in the absence of a shock to
unemployment.

These effects can be put together to give an overall indication of the short-term impact of a permanent rise in
unemployment on the aggregate savings rate, by weighting the above figures by the disposable income of
households headed by people at each age. If I make the assumption that each of the changes to
unemployment since 2007 have been unanticipated and is expected to be permanent, project forward the
unemployment rate using the projections made by the OBR in its November forecast, and then cumulate the
effects shown in Chart 6, the effect of this on saving, relative to its pre-crisis position is shown in Chart 7.

We can see, first of all that the effects of the rise in unemployment can be substantial, and secondly that,
although the influence of a rise in unemployment fades with time. Nevertheless, these effects are less
marked than those identified by Modey, Ohnsorge and Sandri (2012). The reason for this is almost certainly
that they assume the sole risk people face to labour income is that of unemployment. In other words they
neglect the normal labour market churn which is a substantial source of uncertainty to many people and thus
overstate the proportionate impact of increased unemployment.

More importantly, if unemployment falls off next year as forecast by the OBR, the upward pressure on the
savings rate from this source is likely to ease. Of course, if people’s expectations adjust slowly or if
consumption is based partly on habit, then these effects may be smoothed out so that, in particular, the drop
in the savings rate next year may be less marked.

However we should avoid drawing the conclusion that movements in unemployment necessarily exert a
strong pro-cyclical influence on demand through this route. The impact is shown on the assumption that

10

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

10

people expect the increase in unemployment to be permanent. Such expectations might not be rational in a
typical economic cycle.

A Rising State Pension Age and Social Security Reform

The state benefit system is likely to have a substantial impact on household savings behaviour. There are
two reasons for this. First of all, the payment of state pensions to old people reduces the need to save for
retirement. The retirement pension is not large compared with, for example, the median income of someone
in full-time work. But, nevertheless, it is a close to universal benefit and provides a substantial resource to
people in old age that they would otherwise have to do without, or provide by means of saving while at work.
Secondly, the system of benefits available to people while of working age does provide some sort of back-up
in the event of unemployment and other unfortunate developments such as ill health. In its absence the level
of precautionary saving would be higher.

The social security system as a whole is undergoing substantial change with the introduction of the Universal
Credit for people in work. At the same time increases in the age at which state pensions become available
have been announced in two phases. The 2007 Pensions Act set an eventual pension age of sixty-eight
with earlier rises to sixty-six and sixty-seven. The 2011 Pensions Act accelerated these increases. The
pension age is set to rise to sixty-six over a two-year period centred approximately on 2019 and to
sixty-seven over a two-year period centred on 2027. The date of the increase to sixty-eight remains at 2045
as specified by the 2007 Act.

The full range of changes taking place to the social security system means that it is, to say the least, not
straightforward to analyse their impact on savings behaviour. I would like to limit myself to exploring the
effects, on their own, of the increases in the state pension age. To simplify the analysis I am exploring the
short-term effect of an unanticipated announcement of an increase in the state pension age from sixty-five to
the pattern of pension ages which emerged after the changes in 2011.

In Chart 8 I show the simulated effect of this on the saving behaviour of people of different ages chosen to
reflect the dates of changes to the state pension age. The chart shows the change in saving as a
percentage of mean disposable income by age before the change. It indicates the effect on people from
their age at the time of the announcement to age sixty-five. A striking feature of the simulations is that the
announced increase in the pension age has little impact on saving until people reach their early-40s. The
explanation for this is two-fold. Young people on average would like to consume more than their incomes
because they, at least on the basis of past experience, can expect their incomes to rise with age. People in
their thirties and early forties are likely to save. But at this age it is likely that saving behaviour is dominated
by the precautionary motive. People wish to build up a buffer of savings so as to have something to fall back
on if, for example, they become unemployed.

11

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

11

This observation is entirely consistent with the analysis
presented by Carroll (1997). He suggested that saving

Chart 8: The Effect of Increasing the State
Pension Age on Saving(a)
Percentage points
8
Age at anouncement of change
7
in state pension age:
6
25
34
5
40
47
4
55
3

for retirement does not become important until people
reach their mid to late forties.4 Chart 8 points to a
slightly earlier start, but later in life we can see that the
deferment of the retirement age has a substantial
impact on saving behaviour. This effect is more
marked for those currently in their forties than for those
currently in their fifties mainly because the former face

2

a pension age of sixty-seven while the latter will be able

1

to draw their pensions at sixty-six.

0
-1
20

30

One reason why the increased saving takes place
relatively late in working life is that part of the
mechanism which makes increased saving possible is

40 Age

50

60

Source: National Institute Benefit & Tax Model.
(a) The graph shows the change in saving measured as a
proportion of disposable income in the absence of a shock to
unemployment.

postponed retirement; the simulations reflect the
consequences of increased labour supply from people in their late fifties and early sixties.

We can form an overall estimate of the effect of the change to retirement dates by applying the impact
effects shown in Chart 8 to estimates of disposable income for households whose heads have ages close to
the ages shown. Thus it is assumed that the fifty-five year old household represents the behaviour of
households with heads aged fifty-two to fifty-seven, whose retirement age is sixty-six. The behaviour of
younger households is represented by the impact effects shown for the younger ages as appropriate.

These calculations suggest that the effect of announcing a change from retirement at age sixty-five to the
pattern defined by the 2011 Act would be to raise the savings rate by about 1.1 percentage points.
Eventually, of course, as the people whose saving is increased actually reach sixty-five they will start to draw
down on their savings as a partial replacement for the pensions they no longer receive. So the eventual
impact on saving will be small. But, looking at the impacts after one, two and three years, the simulations do
not suggest that the effects are likely to decline, because, as the people affected move closer to retirement,
their savings rates tend to rise rather than to fall. For quite a while we are likely to see savings rates around
one percentage point higher than they would have been without the change.

I am not, of course, claiming that the overall effect of all the changes to the pension and benefit system is to
raise the savings rate in this way. Other important changes include the introduction of the Universal Credit

4

It should be noted that this result does not depend on the combination of a discount rate of 10 per cent per annum and zero real
interest rate assumed by Carroll. The model used here has a discount rate of just over 3 per cent per annum and returns of 2.7 per
cent per annum or 4 per cent per annum depending on whether savings are liquid or not.
12

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

12

and the commitment to increasing the retirement pension annually by highest of wage growth, price
increases or 2½%. But the exercise does demonstrate that, with plausible assumptions about people’s
behaviour, changes to social security can have a non-trivial influence on saving and might lead us to expect
a savings rate higher than we have seen in the past.

Housing, Wealth and the Availability of Credit

My initial analysis was conducted with respect to disposable income. Since wealth is the capitalised value of
property income and since I assumed that real interest rates will return to their pre-crisis levels, there was an
implicit assumption that asset holdings per capita eventually fall in line with disposable income. The reason
for looking at the problem in this way rather than through the more conventional framework which focuses on
non-property income and initial wealth holdings is that returns on major asset holdings, housing and equities,
have not fallen in line with the short-term interest rate, even after adjusting for credit spread effects. And one
has to remember that, before the crisis, most indicators suggested that house prices were unusually high. It
is perfectly possible that the decline in real house prices since the crisis has been an important factor in
bringing the savings ratio much closer to its historic average. At the same time, it is noteworthy that, while
real house prices have fallen by over a quarter since their peak, they are, relative to income, still 8 per cent
above their long-run average. This could largely be explained by low real short-term interest rates. Or it
could be explained by other offsetting factors. For example, tight credit could be depressing house prices
while they may also be receiving substantial support as a consequence of the effects of the Bank’s asset
purchase programmes on long-term interest rates.

Some studies suggest that housing wealth exerts a stronger influence on spending than do other forms of
wealth; the impact depends on a range of factors including the extent to which people feel they should leave
their houses to their descendents. But if instead of looking just at house prices I look at overall household
sector wealth the picture is quite striking. Averaged over the period 1989-2007 households held net wealth
equal to 5.72 times their income. The most recent estimates suggest that that ratio is currently 6.64. This
suggests that to the extent that people spend more than just the property income earned by their wealth, we
should expect to see consumption supported rather than squeezed by balance sheet effects. But it is hard to
see this effect5 amounting to more than one to two percentage points since, in working with reference to
disposable income, I am already taking account of spending out of the income generated by that wealth.

Might there nevertheless be separate influences on consumption from movements in the availability of
credit? Access to unsecured credit means that young people, who might reasonably expect their incomes to
rise fairly sharply early in working life, can borrow to smooth out their consumption over their lifetimes.
Reduced access to credit limits their consumption when young and raises it when they age, but it does not,

5

If I assume that the real return on wealth after tax is 3 per cent and that the propensity to spend out of wealth is 4 to 5 per cent. The
assumption about the savings rate means that nearly all the income from wealth is already assumed spent. Such a propensity to spend
out of wealth is more appropriate for permanent than transitory wealth (Lettau and Ludwigson, 2004).
13

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

13

of course, lead to a corresponding increase in consumption of today’s old people. Access to unsecured
credit or the ability to use a home as collateral reduces the need for precautionary saving (Lustig and van
Nieuwerburgh, 2005). For both these reasons, both a tightening of the conditions on which credit is available
and a fear, whether well-founded or not, that people will not be able to obtain credit in the event of an
adverse shock to their income, will lead to an increase in saving.
The framework I used to explore unemployment risk and the effects of delayed retirement is of only limited
use to explore credit issues; it does not fully explain the observed level of unsecured borrowing.
Chatterjee, Corbae, Nakajima and Rios-Rull (2007) in an impressive piece of work, developed a model in
which the threat of penalties associated with bankruptcy generated an equilibrium in which most people
repaid their unsecured debts while the risk premium on unsecured lending was endogenous. But there are
questions how well their model represents the various risks people face and I have not seen it used to
attempt to account for the factors which might lead to a reduction in unsecured indebtedness of the type
which has actually occurred.
The problems which arise in the use of this sort of framework to examine the effects of changed perceptions
about access to mortgage credit are, if anything, even more acute and simplification is needed to make any
progress. Thus Attanasio et al. (2011) assume that home owners can choose between only two types of
homes, flats and houses. All houses have the same price and flat prices are a fixed fraction of house prices.
These simplifying assumptions mean that they can represent the point that people make housing
transactions only infrequently and that the dominant effect of high house prices on consumption comes
through its influence on the consumption of old people. As I noted, this is a possible factor behind the
pattern shown in Chart 4.
The issue of credit availability, however, cannot be
ignored. The Bank of England’s Credit Conditions
survey suggested that the availability of both secured
and unsecured credit to households fell sharply in 2008
(Chart 9), with the decline in the availability of

Chart 9: Household credit availability(a)(b)
Net percentage
Cumulated net percentage
balance
balances
50
25
Bars are net percentage
balance
0
0
-50

-25

unsecured credit stretching in to early 2010. Over this
period the ratio of unsecured debt to income has fallen

-50

steadily from an average of 26.8 per cent in 2007 to

-75

income in 2007 to 114 per cent of income by late 2011.
On the other hand the decline in house prices means
that, relative to housing wealth, secured debt has risen
by around 6 per cent.

-150
Secured

23.9 per cent by late 2011. The ratio of secured debt to
income has fallen from an average of 120 per cent of

-100
Unsecured

-200

-100
-125
2007

Lines are cumulated net
percentage balance
2008

2009

2010

-250

2011

Source: Bank of England
(a) Net percentage balances are calculated by weighting
together the responses of those lenders who answered the
question. The bars show the responses over the previous
three months.
(b) A positive balance indicates that more secured credit is
available.

14

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

14

The survey suggests that the tightness of credit has not reversed since the early days of the financial crisis.
This may affect consumption in several ways. First, one would expect the impact of unexpected difficulty in
access to credit to have a sharp impact on spending in the short term and a fading impact in the longer term.
Secondly, households’ concern that they may not have access to credit, when they might find it useful, is
likely to make aggregate consumption more sensitive to income and less sensitive to interest rates than
would otherwise be the case, As I have explained above, there is no straightforward way of quantifying this
effect satisfactorily.6 Nevertheless, any easing of credit conditions would be likely to support consumption.

Where do we go from here?

The main driver of consumption I have identified is income. This is hardly an original point, but I come
across a remarkable number of people who stress what they call consumer confidence and lose sight of the
fact that spending has to be paid for somehow. The large fall in national income following the crisis therefore
accounts for the bulk of the fall in consumption we have seen over recent years. I have also identified a
number of additional influences which are likely to depress consumption relative to pre-crisis experience: the
hit to income that is skewed towards the young; changes in state pension age; a greater risk of
unemployment and tighter credit conditions. On the other side, households’ high level of wealth relative to
income could have helped support consumption.

Turning to the most recent data, consumption appears to be growing again. The ONS estimate that private
consumption grew 0.4% in Q4 – the first increase in consumption since 2010 Q3 – though overall GDP fell
0.2% as a result of weak business investment and reduced stockbuilding. Indicators of the state of the
economy this year have been more positive for overall GDP growth, and the retail sales figures suggest
consumption may be continuing to rise in Q1. At the same time we need to remind ourselves that the signals
they provide are imprecise and that a few swallows do not make a summer. The distortions resulting from
the holiday for the Queen’s Diamond Jubilee mean that the data, as they emerge, will be harder to interpret
than is usually the case.

Looking ahead, the forecast in our Inflation Report suggests that reasonably normal economic growth is not
likely to resume until late this year. If evidence builds that the OBR’s projections for future incomes are too
pessimistic, then we might expect to see more rapid growth of consumption and the shoppers’ strike will lose
some of its force. And some of the factors weighing on consumption are likely to fade as unemployment
eventually starts to fall back or as the availability of credit increases again. But other factors that have been
depressing consumption are likely to persist, so there is a risk that the savings rate will settle at a level higher
than the average of past experience. Since the actual savings rate is currently just below the average of
past experience (Chart 3), this points to limited room for a rebound in consumption growth. And while low
expected interest rates can support the level of consumption, because they bring consumption forward, they
6

The profile I have used for future household interest rates already assumes that the excess margin faced by households over Bank
Rate declines with time. But availability of credit is a separate matter.
15

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

15

could, for the same reason, lead to a lower growth rate of consumption over the medium term. After all,
people cannot spend their money twice. So on balance, what I have described represents a downside risk to
the medium-term growth projections in our recent Inflation Report.

Such a downside risk may not, of course, materialise and does not automatically translate into a presumption
that inflation will be markedly lower than the Report indicates for two reasons. First, even if consumption
does grow less rapidly than income, it is possible, that improving export demand or rising business
confidence and reviving investment will nevertheless support the economy; indeed the most recent CBI
survey suggests a much improved export picture. Secondly, weaker overall demand does not necessarily
translate into below-target inflation in the medium term.

Indeed, although the economy has recently been weak, inflation remains above target. The inflation rate has
fallen sharply as the effects of the VAT increase and some of the fuel price increases have dropped out of
the numbers. But, on a seasonally-adjusted basis, the monthly rate of inflation, which fell below a level
compatible with the target at the end of last year, seems likely to be higher than is consistent with the target
in the first half of this year. The price of oil is a particular worry. The further out we go, of course, the more
uncertain things become. Nevertheless, this does suggest a risk that there may be more persistence to
inflation than one might expect at a time of rising unemployment and weak demand. Further ahead, there
remains a risk that an eventual return to more normal economic conditions will be associated with increased
wage pressures. Judgements about the magnitude of this are inevitably uncertain and it is hard to avoid the
sense of an additional upside risk.

I argued, after our November forecast, that one could be less pessimistic about inflation than our forecast
showed – pessimistic in the sense of seeing it less far below target at the two-year horizon – but still see a
case for further quantitative easing once the programme we announced in October came to an end. At
present for the reasons I have outlined above, I do not think there is likely to be a further case once our
current programme is complete. Indeed the yield curve suggests that an increase in Bank Rate is not fully
priced in until mid-2014. But, obviously, if the very real risks I see about inflation do materialise, then it is
perfectly possible that the first rise will come earlier than that.

16

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

16

References
Abel, A B (1990), “Asset Prices under Habit Formation and Catching Up with the Joneses”, American
Economic Review, Vol. 80, pages 38-42.
Arulampalam, W (2001), “Is Unemployment Really Scarring? Effects of Unemployment Experiences on
Wages”, Economic Journal, Vol. 111, No. 475, pages F585-F606.
Attanasio, O P, Blow, L, Hamilton, R and Leicester, A (2009), “Booms and Busts: Consumption, House
Prices and Expectations”, Economica, Vol. 76, No. 301, pages 20-50.
Attanasio, O, Leicester, A and Wakefield, M (2011), “Do House Prices Drive Consumption Growth? The
Coincident Cycles of House Prices and Consumption in the UK”, Journal of the European Economic
Association, Vol. 9, No. 3, pages 399-435.
Barrell, R and Davis, E P (2007), “Financial Liberalisation, Consumption and Wealth Effects in Seven
OECD Countries”, Scottish Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 54, No. 2, pages 254-267.
Campbell, J Y and Cocco, J F (2007), “How Do House Prices Affect Consumption? Evidence from Micro
Data”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 54, No 3, pages 591-621.
Carroll, C (1997), “Buffer-stock saving and the Life-cycle/Permanent Income Hypothesis”, Quarterly Journal
of Economics, Vol. 112, pages 1-55.
Chatterjee, S, D Corbae, M, Nakajima and Rios-Rull, J-V (2007), “A Quantitative Theory of Unsecured
Consumer Credit with Risk of Default”, Econometrica, Vol. 75, pages 1525-1589.
Deaton, A (1992), Understanding Consumption, Clarendon Press Oxford.
Gregg, P and Tominey, E (2004), “The Wage Scar from Youth Unemployment”, CMPO Working Paper
04/097.
Gregory, M and Jukes, R (2001), “Unemployment and Subsequent Earnings: Estimating Scarring Among
British Men 1984-94”, Economic Journal, Vol. 111, No. 475, pages F607-F625.
Keynes, J M (1930), Treatise on Money, Macmillan, London.
Lettau, M and Ludvigson, S C (2004), “Understanding Trend and Cycle in Asset Values: re-evaluating the
Wealth Effect on Consumption”, American Economic Review, Vol. 94, pages 276-299.
Lustig, H N and van Nieuwerburgh, S G (2005), “Housing Collateral, Consumption Insurance and Risk
Premia: an Empirical Perspective”, Journal of Finance, Vol. 60, pages 1167-1219.
Modigliani, F and Brumberg, R (1954), “Utility Analysis and the Consumption Function: an Interpretation of
Cross-section Data” In K Kurihara (ed.) Post Keynesian Economics, Rutgers University Press, New
Brunswick.
Mody, A, Ohnsorge, F and Sandri, D (2012), “Precautionary Savings in the Great Recession”, IMF
Working Paper, WP/12/42, http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2012/wp1242.pdf.
Sefton, J, van de Ven, J and Weale, M R (2008), “Means Testing Retirement Benefits: Fostering Equity or
Discouraging Savings”, Economic Journal, Vol. 118, pages 556-590.
Sefton, J and van de Ven, J (2009), "Optimal Design of Means Tested Retirement Benefits", Economic
Journal, Vol. 119, pages. F461-81.

17

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

17

Stone, J R N and Rowe, D A (1958), “Dynamic Demand Functions: some Econometric Results”, Economic
Journal, Vol. 68, pages 256-270.
Van de Ven, J (2011), “A Structural Dynamic Microsimulation Model of Household Savings and Labour
Supply”, Economic Modelling, Vol. 28, pages 2054-2070.
Waldron, M and Zampolli, F (2010), “Household Debt, House Prices and Consumption in the United
Kingdom: a Quantitative Theoretical Analysis”, Bank of England Working Paper, No. 379.

18

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

18

