FT World Gold Conference
Speech given by
David Clementi

14 June 1999

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Ladies and gentlemen it is a great pleasure to be here this morning.

My announced theme today - the role of the Bank of England and of London as we enter the new millennium
- is, on the face of it, a pretty broad one. The explanation for that is not so much high ambition, but that I had
to choose a title some time ago, and did not at that point know that I would stand before you today in the
wake of some significant policy announcements about the UK's gold reserves.

Nevertheless, I will stick, more or less, to my original theme, although I will obviously have to focus on just a
few aspects of it. So my plan of campaign is as follows. First, I will say something about the recent decision
to sell some of the UK's gold reserves. My main point there is that the decision was driven entirely on
portfolio management grounds, and that the government, and the Bank as its agent, plans to retain a major
presence in the gold market. Returning to my announced theme I then want to go on to outline the range of
other markets in which the Bank retains an operational presence. The point is that, since monetary
independence, the Bank's monetary policy work has - quite rightly - been scarcely out of the news. But the
Bank has other major policy responsibilities as well - most importantly the pursuit of financial stability - and a
keen interest, and involvement in, a whole range of financial markets in order to pursue them. So I then want
to talk in more detail about the Bank's financial stability role: what it consists of, and how we go about it.
Finally I will end by saying a few words about the role technological advance is playing in changing the
shape of all financial markets - an area of interest, though also of irreducible uncertainty, for policy makers,
issuers, investors and intermediaries everywhere.

I would like first to take a few minutes to explain the rationale behind the decision, announced on 7 May, to
sell around 60% of the UK's gold reserves. There were in fact three key elements of the announcement.
First, that 125 tonnes of gold would be sold in this financial year. Second, that this gold would be sold by
single price auctions; there will in fact be five auctions between now and next March, the first of which is on 6
July. Third that, though further disposals are planned for future years, the government has stated that around
300 tonnes of gold will be retained in the reserves.

Now there has been a certain amount of speculation as to the rationale for these decisions. I should say first
of all that it would be quite wrong to suppose that the decision to sell gold arose because the authorities had
concluded that the gold price was going to fall further; or that gold had no role in our reserve management
strategy; or that it pre-empted a decision on EMU entry. Instead, the decision reflected a view as to what the
right combination of risk and return was for the UK's reserves. Gold currently represents just over two fifths
of our net reserves - those reserves which are, effectively, financed by sterling liabilities rather than by
matched foreign currency borrowing - and for a country which emphasises diversification as a means of
reducing risk that was too high. But, that said, the risk-return characteristics of gold mean that it does have a
continuing role to play in the UK's reserve management strategy. Even when the sales are complete, gold
will still make up around one fifth of the UK's net foreign exchange reserves.

2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2

Now I know that some analysts have questioned whether this kind of portfolio decision should be taken with
a view to the net reserves, as we have done, or the gross reserves - which are just the total stock of foreign
currency assets, regardless of how they are financed. For some countries the distinction may not have great
significance; many countries' reserves are financed mainly or wholly in the domestic currency or are
managed completely separately from their liabilities. But in the UK the official foreign currency assets and
liabilities are managed together, with the latter hedging a substantial proportion of the former, and so in
taking a decision on portfolio diversification grounds it is clearly the net reserves which are the relevant
benchmark.

Of course, the Treasury and we at the Bank were never under any illusion that this would be a popular
decision with gold producers or investors. But I can assure you that the whole process - announcing in
advance the overall scale of the portfolio adjustment, and the decision to proceed by single price auction has been designed to provide maximum transparency, and full information about the scale and timing of
supply. Furthermore, we have consulted the market about the detailed structure of the auctions, and have
chosen the single price format - where all successful bidders buy the gold at the lowest successful price - so
as to increase the confidence of all those bidding. And more generally we hope that the auction process will
foster and focus interest in gold as an investment. Our whole approach is designed to minimise uncertainty
about our intentions in the market; and as far as the gold price is concerned we obviously have as much
interest as anyone (except those who are short!) in seeing some recovery from current levels. On Friday we
published an Information Memorandum setting out the details of the auction programme, and we look
forward to working with the market in making this process a success.

Turning now to other issues, I would like to talk about the 'new' Bank's role in financial markets more
generally. The Bank is involved in financial markets issues for several reasons. At one level, it is because the
Bank is just that - a bank. Although, with the changes to our responsibilities following the last election, the
Bank is no longer responsible for domestic debt management, we still have an operational capacity in a wide
range of markets. As the manager of the government's foreign exchange assets and liabilities we obviously
trade in a range of major foreign currency bond and money markets, as well as in the foreign exchange
markets themselves and as a lender of gold. In the sterling markets, as banker to the banking system as a
whole - perhaps the core central banking function - the Bank stands at the heart of the sterling money
markets, and the sterling payment systems. Also, the Bank retains an operational presence in the gilt market,
partly in order to offer investment services to various central banks, and other, customers.

Now this operational presence in these markets is not an accidental thing. Aside from meeting the
requirements of our customers - of which the most important is the government itself - our presence, actual
or potential, in a wide range of financial markets is fundamental to our work as a central bank in two other
ways. First, information derived from financial markets - both relating to a wide range of financial asset
prices, but also more subtle material relating to market conditions - is of considerable importance to our
analysis of monetary policy and financial stability. And second, although regular monetary policy operations
3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

3

are more or less confined to the core short-term sterling markets, our financial stability role could potentially
require us to operate in a whole range of financial markets.

But just what is this financial stability role? It is not new, but it is now explicitly set out in the 1997
Memorandum of Understanding between the Bank, the Treasury and the FSA. That says that the Bank is
responsible for the overall stability of the UK financial system. What stability means in this context is that the
financial system is able to perform three key functions effectively. The first of these is to provide a secure
means of holding financial assets of all kinds (including money itself). The second is to provide for the safe
and efficient payment and settlement of financial and other claims. And the third is to allocate savings
amongst competing investments.

The emphasis in all this is on the stability of the system, not the liquidity or solvency of particular financial
institutions; systemic stability does not mean that no individual firm should ever fail. But of course the failure
of some firms could be systemic, and that is one reason why the Bank works closely with the FSA, to which
our former responsibility for banking regulation has passed.

In practice, the Bank's financial stability work has essentially three aspects. First, we are working to promote
structures and policies which enhance the robustness of the financial system. This encompasses a broad
range of issues. It includes for example analysing the impact of developments in the regulatory regime
where, for instance, the Bank is closely involved in the work going on internationally to revise the Basel
Accord. Another example is our work to promote further steps to reduce risks in market infrastructure - by
which I mean exchanges, clearing houses and payment and settlement systems.

The latter area is indeed one aspect of the Bank's financial stability work which is specifically singled out in
the MOU. Over the last few years the Bank has promoted vigorously real time gross settlement (RTGS) in
high value payment systems; we think it is the most effective means of minimising the risks arising from intra
day exposures amongst the main settlement banks, which in any modern economy is a key area of systemic
vulnerability. The sterling CHAPS system has incorporated RTGS since April 1996. More recently CHAPS
euro went live on 4 January, and the Bank worked hard in co-operation with other EU central banks to make
sure that the EU-wide TARGET system was launched successfully. More broadly, John Trundle of the Bank
is chairing a group under the aegis of the G10 central banks - but consisting also of representatives of other
central banks and international financial institutions - seeking to devise a set of payment system core
principles. These would be applicable to all countries, and cover the design, operation and oversight of
systemically important payment systems. The overall aim is that such systems should be both safe and
efficient. Other items in our extensive forward agenda in this area includes pushing for full Delivery-versusPayment in securities settlement; taking a close interest in the design and management of central
counterparty clearing houses; monitoring moves towards the consolidation of securities trading, clearing and
settlement in Europe and beyond; and promoting further steps to reduce risk in the settlement of foreign
exchange transactions.
4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

4

In contrast to this structural work, the second aspect of our financial stability work is conjunctural: the
surveillance of current financial stability conditions, including actual or potential shocks, and the extent to
which the financial system has the capacity to absorb them. This work has a lot of different angles. But to
take a few examples, we have recently spent a great deal of time analysing the problems in the various
emerging market economies - in Asia, Russia, Latin America and elsewhere - and in particular looking at
their implications for the UK financial sector. And the Bank is also heavily involved in the debates relating to
the international financial architecture which have been going on in the G7, at the IMF, in the new Financial
Stability Forum and elsewhere, largely in response to these emerging market difficulties. In making our
contribution, the Bank is focusing particularly on methods to involve the private sector constructively and
systematically in crisis prevention and resolution, and on ways to improve debt and liquidity management
(especially of foreign currency exposures) in emerging market economies.

In a similar spirit we have a team looking at events in the major G10 economies and markets which could
threaten UK financial stability. And closer to home, we look very closely at macro - as opposed to firmspecific - developments in key sectors of UK financial services - securities firms, insurance companies, and
especially banks - as well as in the corporate and personal sectors.

Some of this sort of analysis is inevitably sensitive, and the same degree of transparency as we now have in
relation to monetary policy is not appropriate. But our aim is to put as much of our work as is feasible into the
public domain. And the next edition of the Bank's Financial Stability Review - to be published this Thursday will include for the first time a survey of our current view of financial stability conditions.

The final aspect of our financial stability role is that the Bank will, in exceptional circumstances, undertake
official financial operations to limit the risk of problems in particular institutions spreading to other parts of the
financial system - the classic central banking Lender of Last Resort function. Obviously, we hope that such
operations will be needed only very rarely. And, in any crisis, we would liaise very closely with the Treasury
and the FSA (as set out in the Memorandum of Understanding).

Finally, no discussion of current financial stability issues would be complete without covering millennium risk.
However since I, and others from the Bank, have addressed this issue extensively elsewhere I will try to be
brief.

As with other businesses, all financial market participants - investors, intermediaries, and infrastructure
providers - need to work hard to make sure they are ready for the millennium date change. This is an issue
to which the Bank has devoted a great deal of attention - both because of our policy responsibilities and
because we have extensive computer systems of our own. I am satisfied that our own critical systems are
Y2K compliant; and, more broadly, I am confident that the key systems on which the financial system's
stability depends will work. So I think the main risks in financial markets may actually arise from the effects of

5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

5

individual firms altering their behaviour in anticipation of problems elsewhere - which, in aggregate, could
create market problems that rebounded on all firms.

The Bank's focus is now on these so-called "shadow effects" . This is to some extent partly an issue of
confidence. And to that extent it can be addressed by financial sector players being as open as possible with
each other about their preparations. To that end, and to spread the message that the financial sector as a
whole is well prepared, a few weeks ago the Bank and the FSA hosted a symposium on Year 2000 issues.
The overall message was a reassuring one. But that does not mean our work is done. I hope that all financial
sector participants will continue to review critically the work they have already completed on their systems,
as well as their contingency planning.

For the Bank's part we are continuing to review our preparations, and finalise our contingency planning, to
make sure that our key operations are proof against any foreseeable difficulties. We are working with the
banks to make sure that sufficient notes will be available to the public, and are in the right place at the right
time. And we are talking to market participants, the FSA and other central banks, to make sure that our
liquidity provision arrangements work satisfactorily in the run up to the millennium weekend.

Ladies and Gentlemen, I want to end by saying just a few words about one more general aspect of the future
of London and its markets as we enter the next millennium.

All financial markets, in Europe and everywhere else in the world, are being transformed by continuing rapid
technological change. Electronic trading systems have been, or are being, introduced in a wide range of
financial markets. Initiatives are also well advanced to introduce electronic straight through-processing in a
range of markets, allowing the transaction process to be automated from the initial trade right through to its
eventual settlement. And on top of all this there is the, as yet, unknown potential of the internet.

The precise implications of this technological change are, of course, uncertain. But there are several general
trends emerging. First, the distinctions between OTC and exchange traded markets are becoming more
blurred. Some OTC markets are moving away from decentralised bilateral trading to establish some common
market infrastructure; for instance foreign exchange is often now traded over an electronic platform provided
by Reuters or EBS, and the London Clearing House will later this year launch a central counterparty clearing
service for the swaps market. Second, access to markets is being widened, which should enhance liquidity
and in turn widen interest still further - in many markets remote access is becoming a reality, making the
markets more international in scope. Third, competition between the various exchanges and trading
platforms is likely to become more intense. And fourth, the clearing, settlement and payment infrastructure
will have to respond to these changing needs; in Europe there are now at least three proposals for the
consolidation and integration of securities settlement.

6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

6

No policy making institution can ignore the potential impact of continuing technological change; and the Bank
is looking at these issues closely, from its financial stability and monetary stand points, as well as because
we have as our third core purpose the promotion of the efficiency of the UK financial services sector. But no
private sector market participant can afford to ignore them either - and that is as true in the gold market, one
of the oldest of all financial markets, as in the more exotic derivative markets which new technology has itself
made possible.

7

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

7

