“Harrowing the ploughed field” – Refining the standardised
capital regime
Speech given by
Martin Stewart, Director of Bank, Building Societies and Credit Union, Prudential
Regulation Authority

British Bankers’ Association conference – The Challenger and Specialist Banks’
Landscape in the UK
3 March 2017

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

Much has been written on the evolution of UK retail banking post the financial crisis and a recurrent theme
has been the difference between the internal ratings based (IRB) capital approach used by the major UK
banks and building societies and the standardised capital approach used by the mid-tier and smaller firms.
When comparing the capital regimes, an “un-level playing field sloping in favour of the major firms”, seems to
be the common analogy that is used. There are some differences of opinion as to the steepness of the slope,
ranging from a gentle hill, to others claiming firms using the standardised capital regime have a mountain to
climb.

The post-financial crisis prudential reforms were necessary and have done a lot to improve the resilience of
the UK banking sector. However, regulation can lead to unintended consequences and, where appropriate,
the PRA will always seek to address these. To that end, the PRA has undertaken in-depth research over the
last two years into the differences between the capital regimes and today I would like to set out our
conclusions and response.

The primary conclusion from our research is that we agree that the regulatory reforms have had the
unintended consequence of contributing to an un-level playing field. However, we disagree that the playing
field slopes uniformly in favour of the major firms; to continue with the analogy, it can probably be best
described as a ploughed field. Our analysis points to ridges and furrows being created, some ridges favour
those firms using IRB models and others favour those on the standardised capital approach.

So how do we tackle this ploughed field? For those of you that are not city dwellers, you will know that if you
want to prepare a ploughed field for crops to flourish, you first of all need to harrow it, to smooth out the
ridges and furrows ready for planting.

As the first findings of our research emerged, we acted to smooth some of the most significant ridges by
implemented, at the beginning of 2016, a binding leverage constraint on the major banks and building
societies using IRB models. We always recognised that this would not be sufficient on its own and we have
embarked on three further initiatives to harrow the capital field.

Firstly, we have been working at the Basel Committee to create greater risk sensitivity in the standardised
capital approach, which should reduce the variability between standardised and IRB risk weights.
Secondly, we are proposing to refine the PRA’s Pillar 2A capital framework for banks and building societies
using the standardised capital approach and we published a consultation paper on 24 February setting out
our thinking in this area.

Thirdly, we propose to reform the application process for banks and building societies wanting to move from
the standardised capital approach to utilise IRB models and today I am announcing that we will be publishing
a consultation paper later this month on this initiative.
2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

2

Why are we undertaking these three initiatives? The PRA has a primary objective to maintain the safety and
soundness of firms it regulates, and capital regimes that create risk concentrations in groups of firms are not
aligned with this objective and need to be addressed. The PRA’s secondary objective is to facilitate effective
competition in the markets for services provided by PRA-authorised firms and in our judgement effective
competition is currently being distorted by the differences in the capital regimes.

May I focus on residential mortgage lending to illustrate the impact of the different capital regimes. For banks
and building societies operating on the standardised capital approach, the risk weight for residential
mortgage lending is 35% for all lending up to a loan to value of 80%. It is static with no other underwriting
factors being taken into consideration. For the banks and building societies operating IRB models, the risk
weight will be dynamic influenced by a variety of risk factors which include loan to value and loan to income.
The risk weights generated by these models start significantly below 35% and rise as the risk factors
increase. The consequence of a static and dynamic risk weight under the different capital regimes is to
create points of risk concentration, at low LTV lending for firms the using IRB models and at high LTV and
high LTI for firms on the standardised capital approach.

As the cost of capital is a major component in mortgage pricing models, these risk concentrations impact on
the mortgage market, with a cohort of lenders competing in one segment, another cohort competing in a
different segment and some market segments being poorly served.

We have identified that there are ploughed fields of ridges and furrows in many lines of business across UK
retail banking, not just residential mortgage lending and to harrow these will require all three of our initiatives,
which I would like to address in turn:

Working at the Basel Committee

The Basel Committee first consulted on revising the standardised approach for credit risk in December 2014
and following the feedback it received, further consulted in December 2015, with the aim of publishing its
final proposals at the end of 2016. The PRA and the Bank has been very actively engaged at Basel
throughout these consultations, ensuring our research into the differences between the capital regimes in the
UK market was fully considered in the global debate. We were clear that greater risk sensitivity was required
in the standardised approach for credit risk and this had to be combined with some constraints being applied
to the IRB capital models, to ensure the ploughed field was harrowed.

Some commentators badged this work as Basel IV. I want to take this opportunity to emphasise that the PRA
does not see these revisions as a fundamental new Basel regime. Rather they are completing a key part of
the post crisis Basel III reforms, tacking unwarranted risk weighted asset variability and doing so in a way
that does not significantly increase system-wide capital requirements. The work at Basel was very much
focused on harrowing the ploughed field, not re-ploughing it to create a new Basel regime.
3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

3

It has not yet been possible for the Governors and Heads of Supervision to announce the framework’s final
calibration and we will continue to encourage all members of the Basel Committee to find common ground in
this work.
Refining the PRA’s Pillar 2A capital framework for banks and building societies on the standardised
capital approach

On 24 February the PRA published a Consultation Paper CP3/17 setting out our proposals for refining the
Pillar 2A capital framework for firms using the standardised capital approach for credit risk. Why do we
consider this is required? We are concerned that the current risk insensitivity of standardised risk weights,
coupled with a mechanistic approach to calculating Pillar 2A capital, can be a primary contributor to creating
the ploughed field and this concern has also been shared by the Competition and Markets Authority in its
retail banking market investigation that concluded in August 2016.

When a bank or building society undertakes its annual Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process
(ICAAP) it is making its own assessment of the total quantum of capital it considers to be adequate to cover
the level and nature of risks to which it is exposed or could be exposed in a stress event. This is expressed
in terms of pillar 1 capital, Pillar 2A capital and in its pillar 2b capital buffers. This assessment is shared with
the PRA and we hold a Supervisory Review and Evaluation Process (SREP) to formulate our judgement on
the ICAAP. We then notify the firm of the quantum of capital that it should hold at all times and its capital
buffers to ensure that it is able to meet its minimum requirements in a severe but plausible stress.

We are concerned that the mechanistic use of our published Pillar 2A methodologies, coupled with
standardised risk weights can result in a bank or building society, that is well managed and undertaking
mainstream (not niche) lending, holding in total too much regulatory capital, relative to the risks on its
balance sheet. But how do we quantify the degree of this potential over capitalisation? Our proposed
approach is to publish credit risk benchmarks, derived from the banks deploying IRB models. These
benchmarks are not new, we first published these in 2015, we updated them on 24 February and we will
update them annually in future years.

Under the proposals in CP 3/17, we would expect firms to demonstrate in their ICAAPs the degree to which
their business model is low risk and the appropriate level of total capital, given their business mix. This may
include taking into account the higher degree of conservatism that may apply to certain asset classes under
the standardised approach, using the credit risk benchmarks as the reference point for this judgement. A
firm’s board may then conclude that it is appropriate for them to hold less Pillar 2A capital.
The PRA’s SREP will consider whether the use of the credit risk benchmarks is appropriate, primarily
focusing on whether a bank or building society is well managed and in our judgement operating in the

4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

4

mainstream markets from where the benchmarks are derived. Where we concur that the use of the
benchmarks is appropriate this will also inform our judgement to reduce Pillar 2A capital.
This “refined” approach to assessing overall regulatory capital requirements, informed by credit risk
benchmarks is a significant change to our approach and we welcome responses to CP3/17, to enable us to
publish our final policy statement later this year.

In publishing this consultation paper we are also tackling concerns that the introduction of accounting
standard IFRS9 on 1 January 2018 could further exacerbate the difference between the standardised capital
approach and IRB models. To mitigate this emerging risk, we are proposing to publish different credit risk
benchmarks for firms operating on UK GAAP and IFRS to ensure that new ridges and furrows are not
created as a consequence of different accounting standards.

Reforming the application process for banks and building societies wanting to move from the
standardised to using IRB models

Running IRB models does require a significant additional investment in risk infrastructure for banks and
building societies wishing to move from the standardised capital approach. Through our work at Basel and
refining the Pillar 2A capital framework, the PRA’s objective is to ensure we have an approach that harrows
the ploughed field for firms using the standardised capital approach and therefore reduces the incentive for
all firms to make this investment. However, we acknowledge that the impact of the IFRS9 accounting
standard, coupled with the requirement for some banks and building societies to hold additional financial
resources, to ensure they are resolvable, that is over and above total regulatory capital requirements, may
now justify the investment, when previously the business case could not be made.

Our research into transitioning from the standardised capital approach to using IRB models, which we
published in the PRA’s 2016 Annual Competition Report, indicated that there were 3 significant issues firms
faced when making the step:
1. Clarity of the PRA’s expectations in respect of our requirements to permit the use of IRB models.
2. Understanding of the PRA’s assessment process.
3. Data inadequacies.

At the end of this month, we will be consulting on revising our Internal Ratings Based Supervisory Statement
first published in 2013 (SS11/13). I must reinforce that the revisions are not about lowering standards, which
must be maintained to ensure regulatory requirements are robust, and the PRA will remain consistent in its
assessment methodologies for all IRB frameworks, whether they are being deployed by a global bank or a
UK residential mortgage lender.

5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

5

Our work will go beyond publishing a consultation paper.

Firstly, to improve the clarity of our expectations, we will publish extensive information on our website and
engage with firms in the pre-application process. This will very much mirror the approach we have adopted
for new banking applications. I must be clear, the PRA will not be acting as a consultant, nor provide
pre-approval but we will ensure that all firms have the opportunity to discuss our expectations and
idiosyncratic issues before submitting their application.

Secondly, we will propose extensive revisions to our assessment process, into ten modules, so that a firm is
clear where it is at all times within our assessment work. These modules will start with scoping, then a
technical review, examination of underlying data, before moving on to the use test. Modules five to eight will
assess partial use and roll-out plans, reporting, independent validation and governance. Module nine will
involve the PRA bringing all of its work together to set out a preliminary recommendation, before moving to
module ten - approval. We do acknowledge that we may sometimes require firms to undertake some
remediation actions when we issue our preliminary recommendation, with the requirement for these to be
completed before we can give final approval.

A key part of our consultation will set out our proposed approach to address the difficulty in building up data
points for IRB models in the current economic environment. This is a considerable issue for both new and
some established firms, particularly as loss given default requires not only default data but also subsequent
possession information. We found that the time taken to model loss given default can become the greatest
constraint in the evolution of a firm’s IRB models and supporting framework. We will be setting out our
expectations for banks and building societies who in developing IRB models for residential mortgages want
to augment limited internal data with external data sources, and how additional margins of conservatism will
need to be overlaid on the external data.
Our aim in the upcoming consultation paper is to address the “data conundrum” considered to be an
unsurmountable issue faced by some banks and building societies wishing to use IRB models.

Conclusion

So may I conclude by bringing us back to our field. The analysis the PRA has undertaken over the last two
years challenges the widely held opinion that the playing field is uniformly sloping in favour of the major
banks using IRB models. We should view the field as ploughed, with ridges and furrows of risk
concentrations. The PRA is committed to harrow the ploughed field. We will continue to work through the
Basel Committee to create greater risk sensitivity in the standardised capital approach. We would encourage
banks and building societies to respond to our 24 February consultation paper on the Pillar 2A capital regime
and the upcoming consultation paper, to be published later this month, setting out our proposed revisions to
our previous supervisory statement on IRB models and frameworks. This will enable us to take onboard your
6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

6

feedback and publish policy statements later this year that establish a field where both banks and building
societies using IRB models and the standardised capital approach can flourish.

7

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

7

