House Prices, Household Debt and Monetary Policy
Speech given by
Stephen Nickell, Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England

At a private dinner for Glasgow Agency contacts in Glasgow
11 December 2002

I am grateful to Chris Allsopp, Charlie Bean, Mervyn King and Paul Tucker for helpful discussions on this
issue and to Kate Barker for valuable comments on an earlier draft.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

1

Summary
House Prices, Household Debt and Monetary Policy
1. In the November inflation report, the most likely outcome for inflation in 2004
was for a modest undershoot throughout the year. Among reasons for not cutting
rates at this point are one given by the MPC and one often given in the press. This
paper analyses both reasons.
2. The particular reason given in the press is that the MPC did not, and does not, cut
rates simply because the boom in house prices is very strong. The MPC has often
argued both individually and collectively that it is not in business to attempt to
control asset prices. Setting interest rates to control house prices could easily push
both inflation and the economy off course, so this simple explanation as to why
rates were not cut in November will not do.
3. One important reason provided by the MPC for not cutting rates in November was
so as not to encourage further debt accumulation, because this would add to the
risk of sharper falls in consumption and more significant undershooting of the
inflation target further out.
4. Here I analyse two distinct arguments underlying this stated reason. The first is
based on the possibility that households have over-egged the pudding either by
underestimating true real interest rates or by overestimating future nominal
income growth. In the high inflation era prior to 1993, debts were rapidly eroded.
This no longer happens and perhaps households do not fully recognise this fact.
However, the young, who tend to be the most indebted (relative to their income
and assets) and hence the most endangered, were not financially aware in the pre1993 era, so there is little reason to think they are not making sensible judgements
on this score. Indeed, overall, I see no strong reasons why households, or indeed
lenders, should be behaving particularly imprudently. Nor is there any persuasive
evidence that they are doing so.
5. The second argument is that the economy will be a more fragile place in the future
if households have very high levels of debt. In particular, in response to a future
adverse shock, higher debt levels would lead to bigger falls in consumption and a
bigger economic slowdown. However, since debt service charges are the problem
here, in a higher debt world adverse shocks could be offset by a more vigorous
monetary policy response. Furthermore, of course, the additional debt which is
likely to be accumulated as a result of a very modest cut in rates now is, itself,
likely to be equally modest.
6. It was my view in November that the dangers noted above were not dangerous
enough to outweigh the dangers in allowing a prospective undershooting of the
target in 2004, particularly as I felt that the most likely projection presented in the
Inflation Report was based on a slightly optimistic outlook for the world economy
and for domestic investment. In the light of this, I voted for a rate cut in
November.

2

House Prices, Household Debt and Monetary Policy
A key issue in the present conduct of UK monetary policy is the high and
unsustainable rate of house price inflation and the build up of household debt. To
quote the October MPC Minutes, the first reason for leaving interest rates unchanged
was “domestic demand was still quite resilient and the economy was growing close to
potential. An interest rate reduction seemed likely at present predominantly to affect
house prices, household borrowing and consumption, which were already increasing
strongly. A further reduction in the repo rate risked creating an unsustainable increase
in debt which might subsequently unwind sharply. This would increase the risk of
undershooting the inflation target in the medium term”. This argument continues to
apply. For example, a typical newspaper comment sets out a somewhat cruder
version prior to the December meeting of the MPC “The Monetary Policy Committee
is expected to decide that the unsustainable house price boom prevents it from cutting
rates to help the ailing corporate sector” (Independent 2 Dec.).
This is an important issue for discussion because the corporate sector is indeed ailing,
with business investment having fallen for seven consecutive quarters. More
important for an inflation targeting committee, the latest MPC inflation projection,
which, in my view, is based on a slightly optimistic view of the world economy and
domestic investment growth, has the most likely path of RPIX inflation slightly below
target throughout 2004. The year 2004 is important because interest rate decisions
taken now will not impact much on inflation until 2004. Given this, if interest rates
were cut a little now, the most likely path of RPIX inflation would move up to the
target in 2004. In the light of this, it is worth considering in more detail the particular
reason quoted above for not cutting rates. First, we look at the summary
interpretation implicit in the Independent quote. Then, we analyse the more subtle
argument contained in the quote from the October Minutes.
Interest Rates and the House Price Boom
House prices in Britain are currently rising extremely rapidly. This house price boom
has had, and is having, an impact on monetary policy and interest rates because house
prices impact directly on consumption and aggregate demand, and hence on future

3

inflation prospects. Future inflation prospects have a direct impact on the setting of
interest rates. However, the argument implicit in the Independent quote goes further
than this. The idea is that house price booms are, of themselves, dangerous for
macroeconomic stability because the bigger the boom, the bigger the subsequent
slump. If policy instruments were available to restrain the boom at an early stage,
they should be used in order to encourage future macroeconomic stability. This
suggests, for example, that policies to raise the current (historically very low) rate of
new housebuilding might be considered. But in the absence of any such policies
which will impact in the short run, the argument goes that interest rates should be
used directly to restrain house price growth on top of their role in hitting the inflation
target. This suggests that interest rates during a housing boom should be set at a
higher level than is required to hit the inflation target. Indeed, probably considerably
higher, if they are to have a significant impact on house price growth.
The general view is that this is not a good idea. The proposition expounded by
Bernanke and Gertler summarises the current consensus, “it is neither necessary nor
desirable for monetary policy to respond to changes in asset prices, except to the
extent that they help to forecast inflationary or deflationary pressures” (Bernanke and
Gertler, 1999, p.115). The analysis underlying this proposition is clearly set out in
any of Bernanke and Gertler (1999), Vickers (1999), Allsopp (2002), King (2002).
The basic argument is straightforward. Raising interest rates simply to restrain asset
price booms may reduce one of the shocks hitting the economy. But this will be at the
probable expense of systematically moving inflation further from target which will
add extra instability of its own. Allsopp summarises the situation as follows: “It is
hard enough to establish a credible (monetary policy) reaction function based on clear
objectives with the interest rate being used to meet the inflation target … If the
interest rate has another role as well, being used to moderate the shock structure (eg,
by heading off bubbles from time to time), the reaction function is far less rule-like
and predictable, and the system is less likely to be transparent and accountable”
(Allsopp, 2002, p.18). Furthermore, as King (2002) notes, in practice the response of
asset prices to changes in monetary policy is so unpredictable – think of the exchange
rate – that targeting asset prices is virtually impossible.

4

In the current context, keeping interest rates higher than is required to hit the inflation
target simply to attempt to restrain the housing boom is not consistent with the
consensus view described above. Since I am completely in accord with this view (see
Nickell, 2002), it is time to look at the more subtle arguments sketched in the initial
quote from the October Minutes.
Sustainability and the growth of domestic demand
Since 1997, UK consumption and domestic demand have been growing faster than
output. Basically, this means that we have been increasing our spending on
consumption and investment at a more rapid rate than the growth of what we produce.
So the rest of the world has been supplying us with more than we are supplying them.
The extent of this imbalance since 1999 is illustrated in Table 1. We can see that on

Table 1
Average Quarterly Real Growth Rates (%)

1999-2001
2002 (first 3 quarters)

Consumption

Domestic Demand

GPD (market prices)

1.16
0.87

0.78
0.48

0.58
0.52

Note: Quarterly growth rates refer to a quarter on the previous quarter.average in the period 19992001, consumption grew exactly twice as fast as GDP. The gap between domestic demand growth and
GDP growth was a more modest 0.2% per quarter. In 2002, these gaps have narrowed somewhat.

average in the period 1999-2001, consumption grew exactly twice as fast as GDP.
The gap between domestic demand growth and GDP growth was a more modest 0.2%
per quarter. In 2002, these gaps have narrowed somewhat.
The first question to ask is whether this is sustainable? If domestic demand grows
more rapidly than GDP growth, there must be a trade deficit. In principle, this can be
funded indefinitely if UK citizens have lots of overseas assets generating high levels
of interest and dividends, and these substantially exceed the interest and dividends
paid out to foreign holders of UK assets. So, to consider sustainability we must add in

5

these income and transfer flows to the trade deficit, the result being the current
account deficit. On average, in 1999-2001, this stood at just under 2 per cent of GDP.
More recently, in 2002, it stands at around 1.6 per cent of GDP. Is this sustainable?
First, it is worth noting that in the period before domestic demand started growing
faster than GDP, we regularly had a current account deficit. In the twenty six years
from 1970 to 1994, it averaged around 1 per cent of GDP. Second, measures of the
current account deficit omit capital gains and losses on asset holdings. According to
the current account statistics, the UK external net asset position should have
deteriorated in recent years because of the current account deficit. Yet under some
measures, there has been no deterioration in the UK external net asset position since
1996 (see Senior and Westwood, 2001, p.390). Since arguably it is this net asset
position which ultimately determines sustainability, the current situation in this regard
is by no means clear cut.
The upshot of this discussion is that measured current account deficits at the existing
level can be sustained for considerable periods without significant adjustments being
required. However, a noticeable feature of the numbers presented in Table 1 is the
fact that household consumption growth is substantially higher than domestic demand
growth, reflecting a “domestic” imbalance which may, itself, carry some dangers for
the future.
Consumption Growth, Debt and the House Price Boom
Household consumption was growing at an average rate greater than 4 per cent per
annum from 1997 to 2001, far in excess of GDP growth. While there has been a
slight slowdown this year, it is still growing at an annualised rate of around 3 ½ per
cent. By contrast, since 1999 the growth of business investment has declined sharply
and has been negative since the first quarter of 2001. To understand what is
happening, we first take one step back and look at the house price boom.

6

House Prices
House prices are currently growing at an annual rate somewhere between 20 and 30
per cent, depending on which index is used. And they are reaching a level, relative to
earnings, which is close to an all-time high. Basically, this is a simple consequence of
high demand (low mortgage rates, high rates of population growth, the attractions of
buy-to-let relative to equity investments) meeting low supply (the lowest rate of new
house building since the Second World War). Particular features of the boom at the
moment are the slowdown in house price inflation in London and the South East and
the weakening of the London rental market contrasting with very high rates of house
price inflation in Northern Britain. Given that London and the South East led the
housing market into the boom, it now appears to be leading it out again. However,
there is probably some way to go, although next year we expect to see a fairly rapid
slowdown in house price inflation across the board. This boom has been, and
remains, a significant part of the consumption story as we shall see.
Consumption Growth and Debt
Why did consumption growth take off in the second half of the 1990s? There appear
to be two main reasons. First, over this period there was strong growth in household
real disposable income, driven by falling unemployment and substantial
improvements in the terms-of-trade (associated with higher levels of the sterling
exchange rate). In so far as these shifts are gradually taken to be permanent, we
should expect to see higher consumption growth over some period, accompanied by a
build up of debt. Furthermore, we would expect this high level of consumption
growth to fall back at some point in the future. Of course, if the terms-of-trade
improvements are subsequently reversed as the sterling exchange rate comes down,
we may then see a more rapid slowdown in consumption growth. However, there can
be no argument for any pre-emptive moves in monetary policy to deal with the
consequence of possible future moves in the exchange rate.
Until 2000, these moves in household consumption growth were supported by the
buoyant equity market but, more recently, this has gone into reverse. The second
main factor underlying rapid household consumption growth arises from the housing

7

market. The key role which housing plays arises from the use of housing equity as
collateral for debt. Suppose you have just bought a house on a 100% mortgage, you
have a secure, well-paid, job with rising real earnings. Despite your mortgage, you
would like to take on some more debt to purchase durables. Your options are a
personal loan at around 10.5 per cent (real rate, 8 per cent) or borrowing on a credit
card at around 15.5 per cent (real rate, 13 per cent). These numbers are the current
average rates in these categories. Now suppose your property appreciates in value by
50 per cent. You can now take out a loan secured on your property at around 5.5 per
cent (real rate, 3 per cent). This enables you to behave as a consumer facing a real
borrowing rate of 3 per cent as opposed to a consumer facing a real borrowing rate of
8 per cent. This makes an enormous difference to your behaviour1. It will be optimal
to consume significantly more and to take on substantially more debt. In fact, this
huge difference between the real interest rate payable on secured debt as opposed to
unsecured debt will enable house prices to have a substantial impact on consumption
irrespective of the underlying level of interest rates within, say, a 2 per cent band2. Of
course, lower interest rates help to generate house price increases in the first place.
But once new housing equity becomes available, we can expect this to have a
significant impact on consumption independently of modest changes in the underlying
interest rate.
So what has actually happened in the last few years? First, gross housing wealth has
risen substantially relative to household disposable income (around 80 percentage
points since 1999). Second, net housing equity (ie, gross housing wealth less secured
lending) has risen significantly as a proportion of gross housing wealth, so it is now
nearly 75 per cent. What this means is that there are more households with significant
net housing equity and those who initially had net housing equity now have
significantly more of it. So many more households now face much lower real
borrowing rates, as we noted above. This is on top of the recent cuts in interest rates
consequent on monetary policy decisions. The consequence of all this is obviously a
significant increase in consumption and household debt as these households avail
themselves of their new opportunities. To summarise, therefore, household
consumption and debt have risen, first because of the rise in disposable incomes
driven by falling unemployment and a significant improvement in the terms-of-trade
and second because the rise in house prices has driven up net housing equity enabling

8

more secured borrowing at real interest rates which are hugely advantageous relative
to those available on unsecured loans. Having understood what has been happening,
we can now address the dangers inherent in this situation.
The Dangers of Record Levels of Household Debt
As we have noted in the previous section, in the face of a sharp rise in both household
disposable income and net housing equity, there are powerful reasons why rational
and sensible households will raise their consumption growth rate and build up debt for
a limited period. Further out, of course, they will ease back on consumption growth.
What are the dangers for monetary policy makers inherent in this process?
Currently, the situation appears benign. Household income gearing is at a low level
and interest rates would have to rise to around 10% if the measure of household
income gearing which includes regular repayments is to reach its average value in the
early 1990s. Furthermore, mortgage arrears are well below their early 1990s high and
the debt build-up is concentrated on low risk groups. Those with the highest debt
levels have the highest levels of net wealth. But the job of the MPC is to look to the
future.
There are two distinct arguments here. The first is based on the possibility that
households have over-egged the pudding either by underestimating the true real
interest rates which they face or by overestimating future nominal income growth.
There are two points. In the era of high inflation which ended in 1993, debts were
rapidly eroded. This no longer happens. But the young, who tend to have the highest
levels of indebtedness relative to both assets and income, were not financially aware
during the high inflation era. Furthermore, this same group tends to have the fastest
rate of real earnings growth3. The second point is that the rise in real disposable
income growth in the late 1990s, generated by the improvement in the term-of-trade,
may have been extrapolated into the future, producing overoptimistic forecasts of
future real income growth. However, since the terms-of-trade have improved at a
trend rate of only ½ per cent per year since 1999 compared with a trend rate of over 2
per cent per year in the three years prior to 1999, it seems unlikely that households
will still be projecting the rapid growth rates of the late 1990s. Nevertheless, the risk

9

remains that some borrowers and indeed lenders, are behaving imprudently, and this
risk must be thrown into the balance.
The second argument concerns the behaviour of the economy in response to shocks if
households have high, as opposed to low, levels of debt. Suppose there is a future
adverse shock to the UK economy – for example, the major European economies do
not recover? This will lead to a rise in UK unemployment and a fall in consumption
whatever the debt levels. The argument here is that higher debt levels will make
things substantially worse. This is because more people will be in a position where
they are unable to extend their borrowings. If they become unemployed, or are
threatened with unemployment, they will significantly reduce consumption because
they will be, or will have the prospect of being, unable to service their debts.
The first question is, will higher debt levels put substantially more people in this
position? In aggregate, there appears to be “plenty of room”. Even now, secured debt
is only around one quarter of gross housing wealth, a substantially lower level than
throughout the 1990s. But the aggregate hides a wide variation across the population
and it is the numbers on the margin which count. Comfort may perhaps be taken from
the fact that data from the Survey of Mortgage Lenders indicate that loan to value
ratios among first-time buyers are modest by historical standards. Similarly, the
proportion of first-time buyers with loan to value ratios in excess of 95% is also at a
relatively low level. Furthermore, there has been a significant demographic shift
towards two earner households over the last two decades and these households have a
greater cushion against unemployment.
Another point worth noting is that because one of the key issues in this argument is
the cost of debt service, this will be moderated by the easing of monetary policy
following the adverse shock. However, the excessive debt may still induce greater
precautionary saving and a larger drop in consumption. Overall, it is hard to quantify
whether higher debt levels will generate a significant additional cut back in
consumption which cannot be modified by easier monetary policy.

10

The Final Question
The final question is, should we keep interest rates higher than would be required to
hit the inflation target during 2004 in order not to encourage further debt
accumulation and increases in house prices, because these will add to the risk of
sharper falls in consumption, leading to even bigger undershooting of the inflation
target further out?
In the October and November MPC meetings, I felt that because of the relatively
minor impact on debt and house prices of a small cut in rates and the very uncertain
nature of the dangers described above, a judgment based simply on the likely
outcomes in the nearer term was the correct one. Since the most likely outcome was
for inflation to undershoot the target throughout 2004, albeit by a small margin, I
judged that it was better to institute a small cut in rates rather than hold off for fear of
exacerbating problems of uncertain magnitude yet further into the future.

11

Footnotes
1. Consider a consumer who lives for 40 years, with initial real earnings y and real
earnings growth of 2 per cent per annum. Her preferences are such as to generate
a flat consumption profile. If she faces a real interest rate of 8 per cent, she will
consume 1.26 y in every period and will have accumulated around 1.65 y in debt
after 10 years. However, if she faces a real interest rate of 3 per cent, she will
consume 1.42 y in every period and will have accumulated around 3.25 y in debt
after 10 years.
2. In footnote 1 we saw that an individual facing a 3 per cent real interest rate
compared to one facing an 8 per cent real interest rate will consume around 12.7%
more in each period and will have accumulated 1.6 y more debt after 10 years,
where y is the initial income. Now suppose interest rates rise by 2 percentage
points. The equivalent numbers for an individual facing a 5 per cent real interest
rate compared to one facing a 10 per cent real interest rate are the former
consumes 10.7% more per period and accumulates 1.3 y more debt than the latter.
So the gap between the two is modified only slightly.
3. Male Earnings functions estimated on Labour Force Survey data indicate that
abstracting from the trend growth of real earnings (around 2 per cent), average
real earnings growth for those aged between 20 and 30 tends to be around 3 per
cent and for those aged between 30 and 40 it is just below 2 per cent.

12

References
Allsopp, C. (2002), “Macroeconomic Policy Rules in Theory and Practice”, Paper
presented at a Cambridge Conference on “Policy Rules – The Next Steps”,
September 19/20.
Bean, C. (2002), “The MPC and the UK Economy: Should we fear the D-words?”,
Speech to The Emmanuel Society, Cambridge, 25 November.
Bernanke, B. S. and Gertler, M. (1999), “Monetary Policy Rules and Asset Price
Volatility”, in New Challenges for Monetary Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City, pp. 77-128.
King, M. (2002), “The Inflation Target Ten Years On”, Speech at the London School
of Economics, 19 November.
Nickell, S. J. (2002), “Monetary Policy Issues: Past, Present, Future”, Bank of
England Quarterly Bulletin 42(3), pp.329-44.
Senior, S. and Westwood, R. (2001), “The External Balance Sheet of the United
Kingdom: Implications for Financial Stability?”, Bank of England Quarterly
Bulletin 41(4), pp. 338-405.
Vickers, J. (1999), “Monetary Policy and Asset Prices”, Bank of England Quarterly
Bulletin 39(4), November, pp. 428-35.

