How low can you go?
Speech given by
Andrew G Haldane, Chief Economist, Bank of England

Portadown Chamber of Commerce, Northern Ireland
18 September 2015

The views are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the Monetary Policy Committee. I
would like to thank John Barrdear, Kristin Forbes, Jeremy Franklin, Bob Gilhooly, Chris Jackson,
Carsten Jung, Iryna Kaminska, Joanna Konings, Theresa Lober, Menno Middeldorp, Ben Nelson,
Matt Roberts-Sklar, Martin Seneca, Alison Schomberg, Emma Sinclair, Thomas Smith, James Talbot,
Martin Weale, Iain de Weymarn, Tomasz Wieladek, Ali Uppal, Chris Young, Abigail Whiting for their
comments and contributions.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

The global financial crisis has thrown up a raft of issues about the future of central banks. These are the
most fundamental challenges to face central banking in a generation, perhaps longer (Haldane (2014)).
They include the role of monetary, macro-prudential and micro-prudential policies and optimal degrees of
transparency and accountability. I will discuss two of these issues: the future of money and the future of
monetary policy.

Both go to the very heart of what makes a central bank special – its balance sheet. A central bank’s balance
sheet is the foundation on which both money and monetary policy are built. A central bank’s liabilities define
the quantity of so-called base money in circulation. And the interest rate on central bank money defines
monetary policy. In that sense, central bank money and monetary policy are two sides of the same coin.

Yet, in practice, money and monetary policy issues have tended to be detached. A central bank’s liabilities
comprise two elements – currency with the public and deposits from banks. Under operating procedures in
most central banks, non-interest bearing currency is supplied perfectly elastically to the public on demand,
while the monetary policy stance involves fixing the interest rate on bank reserves (McLeay et al (2014)). In
this way, the cord connecting currency and monetary policy has been all but cut.

Events since the financial crisis have gone some way towards reconnecting that cord. As interest rates were
lowered to their effective floor in a number of advanced countries, central banks engaged in so-called
Quantitative Easing (QE) – buying assets and crediting banks’ accounts at the central bank. So far, these
asset purchases have totalled $5 trillion, with more planned. They have augmented central banks’ monetary
policy armoury.

These “unconventional” monetary policy actions have re-established some link between central bank money
and monetary policy. But these unconventional policies are intended to be temporary, crisis-related
measures. As QE rolls off over time, the cord connecting central bank money and monetary policies would
be expected to wither gradually. The two sides of the monetary coin would again be separated, the status
quo ante restored.

Yet it is possible that the monetary status quo ante may not be fully restored. If global real interest rates are
persistently lower, central banks may then need to think imaginatively about how to deal on a more durable
basis with the technological constraint imposed by the zero lower bound on interest rates. That may require
a rethink, a fairly fundamental one, of a number of current central bank practices.

I will discuss some of the medium-term options for dealing with this technological constraint. Because all of
these options would represent significant shifts from the past, they would benefit from further research. And
as these are options for the future, there is time to carry out this research. But these issues are also relevant
to monetary policy today, on which I will end with some reflections.

2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2

The Zero Lower Bound

Following the global financial crisis, short-term interest rates fell sharply in a great many countries
internationally. They have remained at low levels in the period since. In a sample of countries globally, 40%
have short-term interest rates below 1%, nearly two thirds have interest rates below 3% and 80% have
interest rates below 5% (Chart 1). In some countries in Europe, short-term interest rates have entered
negative territory.

Among the large advanced economies, official interest rates are effectively at zero. Japanese official interest
rates have been there for over 20 years. In the US, Euro Area and the UK, official interest rates have been
at zero for six years and counting. Each of these countries has augmented monetary policy with large-scale
QE programmes, liquidity injections into the banking system and forward guidance on monetary policy (IMF
(2013)).

The need for unconventional measures arose from a technological constraint – the inability to set negative
interest rates on currency. It is possible to set negative rates on bank reserves – indeed, a number of
countries recently have done so. But without the ability to do so on currency, there is an incentive to switch
to currency whenever interest rates on reserves turn negative.1 That hinders the effectiveness of monetary
policy and is known as the Zero Lower Bound – or ZLB – problem (Ball (2014)).

The ZLB problem is, in one sense, not new. It was discussed at the time of the previous largest and most
damaging financial crisis, the Great Depression. Keynes warned of the ineffectiveness of low interest rates
in his General Theory (Keynes (1936)). It gave rise to his notion of the “liquidity trap”. Keynes also had a
number of imaginative solutions, both monetary and fiscal, for dealing with this problem to which I will return.

Yet for much of the period after the Great Depression, the ZLB problem disappeared from policy view. It
became a topic largely confined to academic rather than policy circles (Blanchard, Dell’Ariccia and Mauro
(2010)). Based on simulations conducted before the crisis, that neglect looked benign. For example,
Reifschneider and Williams (2000) find that, with a 2% inflation target, monetary policy would be constrained
by the ZLB only around 5% of the time.

More recent experience has been salutary. The ZLB has emerged as a real and persisting constraint for
some central banks and a prospective constraint for many more. Pre-crisis simulations of the likelihood of
the ZLB binding were flattered by the low levels of macro-economic risk which characterised the
Great Moderation. Re-calibrating macro-economic risk for experience during the Great Recession, the ZLB
becomes a clear and present danger (for example, Chung, Laforte, Reifschneider and Williams (2012)).

1

Beyond a small wedge, reflecting the opportunity cost of currency storage.
3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

3

Nonetheless, the prevailing orthodoxy among academics and policymakers is that the ZLB problem, while
more persistent than expected, will still be a passing one. As countries recover from the Great Recession,
the ZLB constraint would be expected to slacken, its policy relevance to weaken and the ZLB debate to
return to an academic stage. That, after all, was the lesson from the Great Depression.

Yet that may be the wrong lesson. It was not the crisis alone that caused the ZLB constraint to bind: its
deep roots in fact appear to predate the crisis. And it is questionable whether this constraint will disappear
once the global recovery is complete: the deep roots of the ZLB constraint may be structural and
long-lasting (Buiter and Rahbari (2015)). The Great Recession is, in that sense, different than the
Great Depression. To see that, consider the recent behaviour of global long-term real interest rates.

Chart 2 plots global long-term real interest rates over the past 35 years. Back in the 1990s, world real
interest rates averaged around 4%. With an inflation target of 2%, that meant nominal interest rates
averaging around 6% over the course of a typical cycle. At those levels, monetary policy would have plenty
of room for manoeuvre above the ZLB – 6 percentage points - to cushion the effects of troughs in the
business cycle.

Over the past 30 years, however, world real interest rates have been in secular decline (Broadbent (2014)).
At the dawn of the crisis, they had halved to around 2%. Since then they have fallen further to around zero,
perhaps even into negative territory. With a 2% inflation target, that would now put nominal interest rates, on
average over the cycle, at 2%. And that would mean there is materially less monetary policy room for
manoeuvre than was the case a generation ago.

Too little room? One way to gauge that is to look at “typical” monetary policy loosening cycles in the past.
Chart 3 plots interest rates in the UK, US, Japan and Germany since 1970, while Table 1 looks at loosening
cycles in these countries since 1970 and 1994 (Haldane (2015)). The “typical” loosening cycle is between 3
and 5 percentage points. Either way, interest rate headroom of 2 percentage points would potentially be
insufficient.

An alternative metric on the probability of the ZLB binding is to look at the likelihood of recession. Table 2
looks at cumulative recession probabilities over three time horizons (1, 5 and 10 years ahead) measured
over three historical samples (the UK since 1700 and 1945 and a cross-country panel since 1870).
Recessions occur roughly every 3 to 10 years. Over the course of a decade, they are overwhelmingly more
likely than not.

So given these recession probabilities, how likely is it that interest rates will be at levels that would allow
them to be cut sufficiently to cushion the effects of a typical recession? We can calculate the probability of
interest rates having reached, say, 3% by using the market yield curve. These market-based probabilities
are shown in the final column of Table 2, at different horizons.
4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

4

This suggests that the probability of policymakers needing 3 percentage points of interest rate headroom
comfortably exceeds the likelihood of this headroom being available. Put differently, it is much more likely
than not interest rates may need to return to ground zero at some point in the future. Although no more than
illustrative, these estimates suggest the ZLB could exert a strong gravitational pull on interest rates for some
time to come.

This calculus would overstate that gravitational pull if the yield curve proves to be a poor guide to the future
path of global rate interest rates. For example, if global real rates quickly mean-reverted to their historical
levels of 2-3%, monetary policy headroom would re-open (Chart 4). While the Great Recession and
Great Depression look different today, at least in terms of long-term real interest rates, tomorrow may be
different.

To assess the likelihood of real rates mean-reverting, we need to understand why it is they fell in the first
place. Bank colleagues have recently tried to pinpoint the drivers of global real rates (Rachel and Smith
(forthcoming)). The factors they identify can account for the majority of the 450 basis point fall since the
1980s. They include lower trend growth (100 basis points); worsening demographic trends (90 basis
points); low investment rates due to the falling price of capital goods (50 basis points); rising inequality (45
basis points); and savings gluts in emerging markets (25 basis points).

These factors are not will-of-the-wisp. None is likely to reverse quickly. That being so, lower levels of global
real rates may persist at levels well below their long-term average. This time may indeed be different, not
just from the recent past (the 1980s and 1990s), but from the distant past (the 1930s). And if so, central
banks may find themselves bumping up against the ZLB constraint on a recurrent basis.

Neglect of the ZLB problem would then no longer be benign. So even if policymakers cannot know with
certainly how often it will bind, there are benefits on risk management grounds from considering policy
options which would slacken the ZLB constraint on a durable basis (see Buiter and Panigirtzoglou (2003),
Buiter (2004), Buiter (2009), Kimball (2015)). From a non-exhaustive list, let me discuss three such options.
Each would mark a significant departure from current central bank practices and, as such, would benefit from
further research and reflection.

Revising monetary policy mandates

Over the past few decades, inflation targets in advanced economies have steadily fallen and typically
converged around 2% (Chart 5). In emerging economies, they have fallen faster still and are currently
around 4%. This fall in average inflation targets has mirrored the fall in inflation itself (Chart 6). Indeed, at
present inflation is undershooting those targets, on average by around 1.5 percentage points.

5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

5

After the inflation scare of the 1970s and early 1980s, that disinflationary trajectory has been hugely
beneficial. Nonetheless, the ratchet down in inflation, alongside falls in global real interest rates, has not
been costless. Taming inflation through tight monetary policies came at an output cost, albeit probably a
temporary one. More fundamentally, by lowering steady-state levels of nominal interest rates, lower inflation
targets will have increased the probability of the ZLB constraint binding.

That being so, one option for loosening this constraint would simply be to revise upwards inflation targets.
For example, raising inflation targets to 4% from 2% would provide 2 extra percentage points of interest rate
wiggle room. That is roughly the order of magnitude researchers have suggested might be desirable (Ball
(2014) and Blanchard et al (2010)). Simulations suggest a 4% inflation target gives sufficient monetary
policy space to cushion all but the largest recessions historically (Leigh (2009)).

Put another way, the optimal inflation target is likely to be state-dependent depending, among other things,
on the likelihood of the ZLB constraint binding. That likelihood depends, in turn, on the level of equilibrium
real interest rates. If equilibrium real rates shift, so too should the optimal inflation target (Reifschneider and
Williams (2000)). In other words, theory also would support a revision of monetary mandates.

What of the costs? The welfare costs of inflation arise through various channels (Camba-Mendez and
Rodriguez-Palenzuela (2003), Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2010)) and have been catalogued in a rich literature
(Briault (1995)). But there is little evidence to suggest these costs would be large when moving from
steady-state inflation rates of 2% to 4%. Cross-country studies have found evidence for a negative
relationship between inflation and growth, but the negative effect is typically only observed at rates of
inflation above current targets.2

Let me now add some important notes of caution. This evidence is drawn almost exclusively from periods
when inflation was high and falling. There could be a fundamental difference between the dynamics of
inflation expectations during periods when inflation is high and steadily falling on the one hand, and low and
suddenly rising on the other. At a turning point, there is a risk of excess and asymmetric responses in
inflation expectations (Kobayashi (2013), Kurozumi (2014) and Ascari et al (2014)).

The pattern of UK inflation expectations over time suggests a steady sequence of disinflationary ratchets,
associated with shifts in monetary policy regime and a gradual accretion of credibility (Chart 7). Inflation
expectations have become moored, and increasingly tightly anchored, around the inflation target. And once
moored and anchored, they have been resilient to sea-swells. Even during the Great Recessionary storms,
longer-term measures of UK inflation expectations were remarkably stable.

2

Estimates of the level of this threshold in advanced economies range widely, from around 3% (Khan and Senhadji (2001) and Kremer,
Bick and Nautz (2013)) to 8% (Burdekin, Denzau, Keil, Sitthiyot and Willett (2004)).
6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

6

Reputation, in all walks of life, is hard-earned and easily lost. Inflationary reputation is unlikely to be any
different. So consciously de-anchoring the boat, with a promise to re-anchor some distance north, runs the
risk of a voyage into the monetary unknown. Once un-moored and de-anchored, the course of inflation
expectations is much harder to fathom. That navigational uncertainty is likely to be damaging to
macro-economic stability.

Moreover, there is a deeper point to bear in mind here about society’s preferences, as distinct from
economists’ utterances. The costs of inflation as calculated by economists may not be the same as the
costs of inflation as perceived by normal people. International survey evidence suggests stronger concerns
among the general public about inflation than the academic literature would imply (Shiller (1997)).

In the UK, the Bank conducts regular surveys of public attitudes towards the inflation and the inflation target.
This is revealing about societal inflation preferences. Public attitudes towards the Bank have a strikingly high
correlation with inflation perceptions (Chart 8). This underscores the importance of low inflation for central
bank reputation. It also suggests the public’s preferences appear, if anything, to be for inflation below rather
than above current targets.

Consistent with that, when the public are asked directly about the inflation target they suggest, on average,
that it may if anything be a little too high (Chart 9). Taken together, this evidence suggests that an inflation
target above current levels would not only risk putting central banks’ reputations on the line. More
fundamentally, it could also jar with the general public’s preferences.

The choice of inflation target in the UK is ultimately, and rightly, a choice for the government rather than the
Bank of England. But Friedrich Hayek once likened controlling inflation to holding a tiger by the tail (Hayek
(1979)). In my view, it would be a brave step to tweak this tiger’s tail at the very point we appear to have it
tamed.

QE for all seasons

A second policy option would simply be to accept the ZLB constraint and allow currently “unconventional”
monetary measures to become “conventional”. That might mean accommodating QE as part of the
monetary policy armoury during normal as well as crisis times - a monetary instrument for all seasons.

This approach has some attractions. Unlike increases in inflation targets, it would not be a voyage into the
monetary unknown. QE has been carried out by a number of advanced economy central banks over recent
years. That has provided a fairly rich evidence base on which to assess its efficacy. Moreover, this
evidence base suggests that the QE undertaken so far has, more or less, had its desired impact.

7

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

7

One approach to gauging QE’s impact is to assess the response of asset prices following announced
interventions. Event studies have found that most QE interventions had a statistically significant impact on
asset prices, such as short and longer-term interest rates, corporate bond yields, the exchange rate and
financial market uncertainty (for example, Gagnon, Raskin, Remache and Sack (2011), Breedon, Chadha
and Waters (2012)).

As a simple eyeball-metric, Chart 10 looks at responses of financial market variables across a range of QE
interventions by the Bank of England, US Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank and the Bank of
Japan over the past few years. Each intervention is scaled by national GDP. These charts do not control for
how much QE was expected in advance, but typically, though not always, these responses are
correctly-signed. In a number of these cases, they are also statistically significant.

A second strand of the literature has looked not at the immediate effects of QE on asset markets, but instead
on demand and inflation over medium-term horizons. Often, these studies have used identified VAR
time-series techniques (for example, Baumeister and Benati (2012)). One example is work by my Bank
colleagues, Martin Weale and Tomasz Wieladek (Weale and Wieladek (2015)).

Chart 11, taken from Weale and Wieladek (2015), looks at the impact on real GDP and inflation of doing QE
equivalent to 1% of annual GDP in the US and UK using one of the four identification schemes proposed in
their paper. The impact is correctly-signed and statistically significant. It is also quantitatively significant and
persistent, with an average peak impact on GDP of around 0.3% after around 12 months.3

Taking these ready-reckoners at face value, QE appears to have had a reasonably powerful and timely
impact in stimulating demand and inflation, with impact multipliers not dissimilar to conventional interest rate
policy. Taken at face value, this suggests QE could be a practical and proven means of keeping the
monetary policy engine running and the economy ticking over, should interest rates in future find themselves
parked on the ZLB.

The case against QE becoming a permanent monetary policy fixture hinges, in my view, on three concerns.
First, QE’s effectiveness as a monetary instrument seems likely to be highly state-contingent, and hence
uncertain, at least relative to interest rates. This uncertainty is not just the result of the more limited evidence
base on QE than on interest rates. Rather, it is an intrinsic feature of the transmission mechanism of QE.

All monetary interventions rely for their efficacy on market imperfections. The non-neutrality of interest rates
relies on imperfections in goods and labour markets. Stickiness in goods prices and wages - for example, as
a result of overlapping wage and price contracts (Taylor (1979), Fischer (1977), Calvo (1983), Yun (1996),
Mankiw and Reis (2002)) –allow shifts in nominal interest rates to influence real activity. The effectiveness of
3

Weale and Wieladek (2015) argue there is currently no consensus identification scheme to identify QE shocks. It is for this reason
that they examine four different identification schemes. The 0.3% impact is an average across these four different identification
schemes.
8

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

8

QE relies on these goods and labour market frictions too. But it relies, in addition, on imperfections in asset
markets. These are necessary for a QE-induced rebalancing of portfolios to generate an impact on risk
premia and asset prices (Joyce et al (2014)).

Market frictions are not all created equally. Frictions in goods and labour markets arise from contractual
arrangements, or rules of thumb, between employers and employees of labour or buyers and sellers of
goods (Blanchard and Fisher (1989)). Because there are costs - menu and behavioural - from changing
these arrangements, they tend to be fairly static. Goods and labour market frictions are thus relatively fixed,
or at least state-invariant, over time.

The same is not true of frictions in asset markets. These are shaped, for example, by constraints on
investors’ portfolios and by their risk preferences (Vayanos and Vila (2009)). Both are likely to be
time-varying and highly state contingent (Baker and Wurgler (2007) and Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales
(2013)). Portfolios themselves are altered at high speed and frequency. So too are risk appetites. So shifts
in asset risk premia are sharp and unpredictable (Bollerslev and Todorov (2011)). And assets prices tend to
exhibit excess-sensitivity. Asset market returns are thus likely to be volatile, fat-tailed and highly
state-contingent (Haldane and Nelson (2012)).

All of which has direct implications for the transmission mechanism for QE. If asset frictions are highly
state-dependent and volatile, so too will be the efficacy of QE. Estimates of the impact of QE during periods
of high risk premia and disturbed financial conditions may be very different than when asset markets are
tranquil and risk premia low.

Consistent with that, existing empirical studies point to wide margins of error around QE ready-reckoners
(Table 3). Different episodes of QE have generated quite different impacts. Chart 12 compares the impact
of QE1 (2003-08) and QE2 (2008-15) in Japan. The ready-reckoners differ not just in scale, but also sign.
The key micro-economic point is that these uncertainties are inherently greater for QE than interest rates.
This poses a significant challenge to regularising its use.

Second, executing QE on a larger-scale or putting it on a more permanent footing would risk blurring the
boundary, however subtly, between monetary and fiscal policy. To see why, consider the mechanics of QE.
This typically involves a central bank purchasing either a government or private sector asset. If done so
permanently and on a large enough scale, both are quasi-fiscal acts.

If a central bank executes QE by buying government debt, this is likely to have an impact on the cost of
servicing that debt – indeed, that is one of the channels through which QE is supposed to work. If that
purchase is permanent, it also has implications for the quantity of debt the government needs to issue, for a
given fiscal stance. Either way, there are direct consequences for the government’s budget constraint (Kirby
and Meaning (2015)).
9

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

9

If QE is instead executed by purchases of private assets, although this may have no immediate fiscal
implications, it does have indirect implications for the government’s inter-temporal budget constraint. For
example, if risk on these private asset purchases then crystallises, the liability ultimately falls on the
government’s finances. Whether through public or private purchases, QE has potentially important fiscal
consequences.

This blurring of the fiscal/monetary boundary is likely to be limited if asset purchases are modest in scale and
temporary in nature. Those conditions are likely to be satisfied for the QE executed so far in advanced
economies. The fiscal/monetary boundary can also be demarcated in ways which lessen the risk of blurring.
For example, in the UK there is an explicit agreement to indemnify the Bank against financial losses arising
from QE.

Nonetheless, were QE to grow in scale and permanence, that boundary would become fuzzier. QE then
morphs into fiscal policy and monetary policy risks falling victim to so-called “fiscal dominance” (Woodford
(2001), Cochrane (2011), BIS (2012), Roubini (2014)). That would corrode another hard-won monetary prize
over recent decades – namely, central bank independence. In short, as QE becomes permanent, monetary
policy credibility heads down the most slippery of slopes.

Third, one of the channels through which QE operates is the exchange rate. Conventional interest rate
policy works through the exchange rate channel too. But because QE acts directly on stocks of assets held
by the private sector, the potential for asset market – including foreign exchange market – spillovers is
prospectively greater.

Evidence from QE interventions is consistent with significant exchange rate responses in many cases (Chart
13). Domestic currencies have tended to depreciate in response to domestic QE policy announcements.
But, particularly for small open economies, there are also spillovers from international QE that might be as
important. Chart 14 plots the impact on UK output and inflation of both UK and US QE, scaled as a
percentage of national GDP. US QE appears to have had, if anything, a larger impact on the UK economy
than UK QE.

Given the close alignment of UK and US business cycles, this cross-border spillover is potentially positive for
both countries. But that may not be the case if business cycles are misaligned. International spillovers from
QE could then complicate the setting of national monetary policies. Indeed, the cross-border impact of QE
could then be seen as imposing a potential externality on the international monetary system.

That systemic externality is likely to be small if QE is modest in scale and temporary in nature, as over recent
years. But placing QE on a permanent footing, or operating it on an industrial scale, would amplify that
systemic externality. In my view, that would risk having adverse implications for the longer-term stability of
the global financial system.
10

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

10

For these three reasons, I am doubtful QE for all seasons would be a desirable steady-state monetary
solution for the ZLB problem. And I say that without prejudice to whether QE may have some further
temporary role to play in stimulating aggregate demand, were that required in the near future.

Negative interest rates on currency

That brings me to the third, and perhaps most radical and durable, option. It is one which brings together
issues of currency and monetary policy. It involves finding a technological means either of levying a negative
interest rate on currency, or of breaking the constraint physical currency imposes on setting such a rate
(Buiter (2009)).

These options are not new. Over a century ago, Silvio Gesell proposed levying a stamp tax on currency to
generate a negative interest rate (Gesell (1916)). Keynes discussed this scheme, approvingly, in the
General Theory. More recently, a number of modern-day variants of the stamp tax on currency have been
proposed – for example, by randomly invalidating banknotes by serial number (Mankiw (2009), Goodfriend
(2000)).

A more radical proposal still would be to remove the ZLB constraint entirely by abolishing paper currency.
This, too, has recently had its supporters (for example, Rogoff (2014)). As well as solving the ZLB problem,
it has the added advantage of taxing illicit activities undertaken using paper currency, such as drug-dealing,
at source.

A third option is to set an explicit exchange rate between paper currency and electronic (or bank) money.
Having paper currency steadily depreciate relative to digital money effectively generates a negative interest
rate on currency, provided electronic money is accepted by the public as the unit of account rather than
currency. This again is an old idea (Eisler (1932)), recently revitalised and updated (for example, Kimball
(2015)).

All of these options could, in principle, solve the ZLB problem. In practice, each of them faces a significant
behavioural constraint. Government-backed currency is a social convention, certainly as the unit of account
and to lesser extent as a medium of exchange. These social conventions are not easily shifted, whether by
taxing, switching or abolishing them. That is why, despite its seeming unattractiveness, currency demand
has continued to rise faster than money GDP in a number of countries (Fish and Whymark (2015)).

One interesting solution, then, would be to maintain the principle of a government-backed currency, but have
it issued in an electronic rather than paper form. This would preserve the social convention of a state-issued
unit of account and medium of exchange, albeit with currency now held in digital rather than physical wallets.
But it would allow negative interest rates to be levied on currency easily and speedily, so relaxing the ZLB
constraint.
11

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

11

Would such a monetary technology be feasible? In one sense, there is nothing new about digital,
state-issued money. Bank deposits at the central bank are precisely that. The technology underpinning
digital or crypto-currencies has, however, changed rapidly over the past few years. And it has done so for
one very simple reason: Bitcoin.

In its short life, Bitcoin has emerged as a monetary enigma. It divides opinion like nothing else (for example,
Yermack (2013), Shin (2015)). Some countries have banned its use. Others have encouraged it. Some
economists have denounced it as monetary snake oil. Others have proclaimed it a monetary cure-all for the
sins of the state.

What I think is now reasonably clear is that the distributed payment technology embodied in Bitcoin has real
potential. On the face of it, it solves a deep problem in monetary economics: how to establish trust – the
essence of money – in a distributed network. Bitcoin’s “blockchain” technology appears to offer an
imaginative solution to that distributed trust problem (Ali, Barrdear, Clews and Southgate (2014)).

Whether a variant of this technology could support central bank-issued digital currency is very much an open
question. So too is whether the public would accept it as a substitute for paper currency.
Central bank-issued digital currency raises big logistical and behavioural questions too. How practically
would it work? What security and privacy risks would it raise? And how would public and privately-issued
monies interact?

These questions do not have easy answers. That is why work on central bank–issued digital currencies
forms a core part of the Bank’s current research agenda (Bank of England (2015)). Although the hurdles to
implementation are high, so too is the potential prize if the ZLB constraint could be slackened. Perhaps
central bank money is ripe for its own great technological leap forward, prompted by the pressing demands
of the ZLB.

Monetary policy today

Crypto-currencies may, or may not, shape monetary policy in the future. Let me conclude with some
thoughts on the factors shaping monetary policy in the present.

Over the past few months, debate on the global economy has been dominated by news from Greece and
China. In my view, these should not been seen as independent events, as lightning bolts from the blue.
Rather, they are part of a connected sequence of financial disturbances that have hit the global economic
and financial system over the past decade.

12

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

12

Recent events form the latest leg of what might be called a three-part crisis trilogy. Part One of that trilogy
was the “Anglo-Saxon” crisis of 2008/09. Part Two was the “Euro-Area” crisis of 2011/12. And we may now
be entering the early stages of Part Three of the trilogy, the “Emerging Market” crisis of 2015 onwards.

This trilogy has a common storyline. The three crisis legs have common cause in a large slug of global
liquidity. As this has rotated around the international financial system, it has by turns inflated then deflated
capital flows, credit, asset prices and growth in different markets and regions. That pattern characterised the
first and second legs of the crisis (Wolf (2014)). And the embryonic third leg has many of the same
ingredients.

Immediately after the crisis, $600 billion of capital rotated out of crisis-afflicted advanced and into emerging
market economies (EMEs). Peak to trough, this lowered EME bond spreads by around 200-300bp. And as
capital rotated into EMEs from advanced economies, so too did growth. Since 2010, annual growth in EMEs
has averaged 6%, three times that in advanced economies. EMEs have accounted for 80% of global growth,
with China alone contributing around half.

Over the past 18 months, that cycle has turned decisively. In the past year, $300 billion of capital has flowed
out of EMEs on official estimates. Unofficial estimates put that number much higher, not least given recent
capital flight from China. EME bond yields have risen by over 100bps. And, as on the way up, where money
has lead growth is now following. The IMF forecast EME growth will slow to below 4% this year.

It is not difficult to identify the headwinds to EME growth, few of which seem likely to abate quickly. They
include a debt overhang from the credit and capital flow boom; a significant downturn in the commodity price
cycle, which has intensified and generalised recently; political instabilities; and the prospect of an imminent
tightening of dollar interest rates, in which much of EMEs’ overseas borrowing has been conducted.

In the past, this conflation of factors has often presaged a perfect EME storm (Corsetti et al (1999), Krugman
(2009)). Its epicentre recently has been China. But these headwinds are shared by a significant number of
other EMEs. It is unclear whether these forces will result in a fully-fledged financial crisis, as some EMEs
have significant stock-piles of foreign currency reserves. But these headwinds do seem likely to sap future
EME growth.

From a UK and global perspective, the question then becomes how much of a disinflationary influence, if
any, this EME growth headwind will provide? Experience during the Asian and Latin American crises of the
late 1990s and early 2000s offers some reassurance. Then, advanced economy growth remained robust, at
an average of almost 3%, despite financial convulsions in a sequence of EMEs.

Nonetheless, the world today is rather different. At that time, EMEs accounted for just over 40% of world
output on a PPP-weighted basis. Today, they account for nearer 60%. The global growth implications of
13

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

13

EME slowdown are that much greater now than then. So too is the likely impact on world trade, where
EMEs’ importance has risen from around 25% to around 40% over the same period. Notably, world trade
volumes have contracted during the first part of this year, for the first time since the crisis.

Taking various channels together, the Bank’s non-structural models suggest a 1% fall in EME growth could
slow global and UK growth by around 0.5% over a two year period. It would slow the ship, but not sink it.
Moreover, an important mitigating factor is the significant improvement in the terms of trade for
commodity-importing countries, with oil prices having fallen by 50% and metals prices by 20% over the past
year. Provided the marginal propensity to consume of commodity-importers exceeds that of exporters, this
would be expected to provide a fillip to world growth.

Against that, two important features of the recent fall in commodity prices need to be weighed. First, recent
moves appear largely to have reflected a slowdown in global demand rather than an increase in supply. A
decomposition of oil price moves using asset prices suggests nearly three-quarters of the fall since early May
has been demand-induced (Chart 15). The terms of trade improvement has not been heaven-sent.

Second, for this fall in commodity prices to generate a boost to global growth, any terms of trade windfall
needs to be spent by commodity-importers. The evidence on that having happened over the past 12 months
is mixed. In an environment of post-crisis traumatic stress, it could be that consumers and companies are
playing it safe, using their windfall to save or pay down debt, rather than spend (Haldane (2015)).

It is simply too soon to tell how potent contagion from EMEs to the world economy will be. As events
following the first two legs of the trilogy made clear, however, traditional trade channels are likely to be only
part of the contagion story. In an integrated world, financially and informationally, banking and uncertainty
channels may be every bit as important. Indeed, during the first two legs of the trilogy, they were often the
most potent channels.

It may be third time lucky. Even today, EMEs remain somewhat less integrated into global capital markets
than advanced economies. Nonetheless, degrees of EME financial integration are significant and have
grown rapidly. The share of bond issuance by EMEs as a proportion of total issuance has roughly doubled
since 2006, from around 7% to 13%. As a proportion of global stock market capitalisation, EMEs have risen
from 8% to 14%.

Banking channels are also potentially potent. UK-owned banks’ exposures to Greater China total $540
billion or 100% of core capital. Their exposures to EMEs total $820 billion or 150% of core capital. By
comparison, exposures to the United States – the epicentre of Part One of the trilogy - are $655 billion.
Exposures to the euro-area – epicentre of Part Two – are $960 billion. On these metrics, Part Three is not
so different.

14

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

14

Against these negative external forces are weighing solid UK domestic demand forces. Spending by UK
consumers and companies continues around trend growth rates, supported by high levels of confidence,
easy credit conditions and rising real incomes. The UK unemployment rate has fallen sharply, from over 8%
to 5.5%. Estimates of slack in the economy have fallen sharply too. And with surveys suggesting skill
shortages, there is now some evidence of a long-awaited pick-up in wage growth.

While the UK’s recovery remains on track, there are straws in the wind to suggest slowing growth into the
second half of the year. Employment is softening, with a fall in employment in the second quarter and
surveys suggesting slowing growth rates. Surveys of output growth, in manufacturing, construction and
possibly services, have also recently weakened. All of these data were taken prior to recent EME wobbles.

Standing back a little, output surveys suggest UK growth has been on the gentlest of downward glidepaths
since early 2014. The descent appears to be continuing into the second half of the year. This demand
pattern does not suggest UK monetary conditions have been over-accommodative. That would have
generated a pattern of above-trend and rising growth rates. Instead, we have had a pattern of at-trend and
falling growth rates.

Part of the reason may be the 20% appreciation of sterling in effective terms since mid-2013. Although it is
difficult to pinpoint its precise causes, this appreciation is at least in part a monetary phenomenon. The lion’s
share of sterling’s rise probably reflects the tightening of UK monetary conditions relative to other countries,
the US excepted. During the course of this year alone, at least 35 countries have loosened monetary
conditions.

That is relevant when turning from the real to the nominal side of the UK economy. The picture here is a
weak one. Headline UK consumer price inflation is close to zero, having been significantly but temporarily
depressed by lower energy prices. Even after stripping out food and energy prices, however, the Bank’s
range of core inflation measures average around 1% - in other words, one percentage point shy of the
Bank’s inflation target.

Much the same could be said of labour costs. Stripping out volatile bonuses, whole economy wage inflation
lies in the 2-3% zone. And while underlying wage growth has nudged-up this year, this rise has been at
least matched by higher productivity growth. That leaves unit wage growth at probably no more than 1% and
possibly less – again, about a percentage point shy of the levels necessary to hit the inflation target.

With subdued world growth and prices, and a sharp appreciation of sterling whose effects in lowering
imported prices have yet fully to pass-through, I am not as confident as I would like that one percentage point
of additional nominal pick-up will be forthcoming over the next two years. In my view, the balance of risks to
UK growth, and to UK inflation at the two-year horizon, is skewed squarely and significantly to the downside.

15

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

15

Against that backdrop, the case for raising UK interest rates in the current environment is, for me, some way
from being made. One reason not to do so is that, were the downside risks I have discussed to materialise,
there could be a need to loosen rather than tighten the monetary reins as a next step to support UK growth
and return inflation to target.

Thank you.

16

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

16

References
Ali, R, Barrdear, J, Clews, R, & Southgate, J (2014), ‘The economics of digital currencies’, Bank of
England Quarterly Bulletin, available at:
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/quarterlybulletin/2014/qb14q301.pdf
Ascari, G, Florio, A, Gobbi, A (2014), ‘Transparency, Expectations Anchoring and the
Inflation Target’, working paper available at:
http://www.bath.ac.uk/economics/documents/external_seminar_papers/Transparencyx_Expectations_Ancho
ring_and_the_Inflation_Target_221014.pdf
Baker, M and Wurgler, J (2007), ‘Investor Sentiment in the Stock Market’, Journal of Economic
Perspectives Volume 21, Number 2 Spring 2007, Pages 129–151.
Ball, L (2014), ‘The Case for a Long-Run Inflation Target of Four Percent’, IMF Working Paper 14/92,
available at:
https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2014/wp1492.pdf
Bank of England (2015), ‘One Bank Research Agenda, Discussion Paper’,
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/Documents/onebank/discussion.pdf
Baumeister, C, & Benati, L (2012), ‘Unconventional monetary policy and the great recession - estimating
the impact of a compression in the yield spread at the zero lower bound’, Bank of Canada Working Paper,
available at:
http://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/80753/1/719941490.pdf
Blanchard, O, Dell’Ariccia, G, and Mauro, P (2010), ‘Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy’, IMF Staff Position
Note, available at: https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/spn/2010/spn1003.pdf
BIS (2012), ‘Threat of fiscal dominance?’, BIS Papers No 65, May 2012, available at:
http://www.bis.org/publ/bppdf/bispap65.pdf
Blanchard, O, Dell’Ariccia, G, & Mauro, P (2010), ‘Rethinking macroeconomic policy’, Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking, 42(s1), 199-215, available at:
https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/spn/2010/spn1003.pdf
Blanchard, O and Fisher, S (1989), ‘Lectures on Macroeconomics’, MIT Press, available at:
https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/lectures-macroeconomics
Bollerslev, T and Todorov, V (2011), ‘Tails, Fears, and Risk Premia’, Journal of Finance, Vol 66(6), pp
2165-2211
Breedon, F, Chadha, J, and Waters, A (2012), ‘The financial market impact of UK quantitative easing’,
Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 28, 702-728, available at:
http://www.econ.qmul.ac.uk/papers/doc/wp696.pdf
Briault, C (1995). ‘The costs of inflation’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, pages 33–45, available at:
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/archive/Documents/historicpubs/qb/1995/qb950102.pdf
Broadbent, B (2014), ‘Monetary policy, asset prices and distribution’, speech given at the Society of
Business Economists Annual Conference, available at:
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2014/speech770.pdf
Buiter, W and Panigirtzoglou, N (2003), ‘Overcoming the Zero Bound on Nominal Interest Rates with
Negative Interest on Currency: Gesell’s Solution’, Economic Journal, Volume 113, Issue 490, October 2003,
pp. 723-746.

17

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

17

Buiter, W, (2004), ‘Overcoming the Zero Bound: Gesell vs. Eisler’, Discussion of Mitsuhiro Fukao’s ‘The
Effects of ‘Gesell’ (Currency) Taxes in Promoting Japan’s Economic Recovery’, International Economics and
Economic Policy, Volume 2, Numbers 2-3, November 2005, pp. 189-200.
Buiter, W (2009), ‘Negative nominal interest rates: Three ways to overcome the zero lower bound’, The
North American Journal of Economics and Finance, Elsevier, vol. 20(3), pages 213-238
http://ideas.repec.org/a/eee/ecofin/v20y2009i3p213-238.html
Buiter, W and Rahbari, E (2015), ‘High Time to Get Low: Getting Rid of the Lower Bound On Nominal
Interest Rates’, Citi Research, Economics, Global Economics View, 9 April 2015, available at:
http://willembuiter.com/ELB.pdf
Burdekin, R, Denzau, A, Keil, M, Sitthiyot, T, & Willett, T (2004), ‘When does inflation hurt economic
growth? Different nonlinearities for different economies’, Journal of Macroeconomics, 26(3), 519-532,
available at:
http://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/94561/1/2000-22.pdf
Calvo, G (1983), ‘Staggered Prices in a Utility Maximizing Framework’, Journal of Monetary Economics
12:383-398.
Camba-Mendez, G, García, J, and Palenzuela, D (2003), ‘Relevant economic issues concerning the
optimal rate of inflation’, Monetary Policy Strategy, 91.
Chung, H, Laforte, J-P, Reifschneider, D, and Williams, J (2012), ‘Have We Underestimated the
Likelihood and Severity of Zero Lower Bound Events?’, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 44, 4782, available at:
https://ideas.repec.org/a/mcb/jmoncb/v44y2012ip47-82.html
Cochrane, J (2011), ‘Understanding policy in the great recession: Some unpleasant fiscal arithmetic’,
European Economic Review 55.
Eisler, R (1932), ‘Stable money, the remedy for the economic world crisis: a programme of financial
reconstruction for the International conference’, The Search Publishing Company.
Fish, T and Whymark, R (2015), ‘How has cash usage evolved in recent decades? What might drive
demand in the future?’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, available at:
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/quarterlybulletin/2015/q3prerelease_1.pdf
Fisher, S (1977), ‘Long-Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule’, The
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 85, No. 1 (Feb., 1977), pp. 191-205.
Gagnon, J, Raskin, M, Remache, J and Sack, B (2011), ‘The financial market effects of the Federal
Reserve’s large-scale asset purchases’, International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 7(1), pp. 3–43,
available at:
http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb11q1a1.pdf
Gesell, S (1916), ‘Die Natuerliche Wirtschaftsordnung’, Rudolf Zitzman Verlag,
available in English as ‘The Natural Economic Order’, Peter Owen Ltd, London, 1958.
Goodfriend, M (2000), ‘Overcoming the zero bound on interest rate policy’, Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking, 1007-1035.
Guiso, L, Sapienza, P and Zingales, L (2013), ‘Time Varying Risk Aversion’, NBER Working Paper No.
19284, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Haldane, A (2014), ‘Halfway up the stairs’, Central Banking Journal, available at:
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2014/speech751.pdf

18

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

18

Haldane, A (2015), ‘Stuck’, speech delivered at the Open University, Milton Keynes, available at:
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2015/speech828.pdf
Haldane, A and Nelson, B (2012), ‘Tails of Unexpected’, speech given at ‘The Credit Crisis Five Years On:
Unpacking the Crisis’, conference held at the
University of Edinburgh Business School
Hayek, F (1979), ‘A Tiger by the Tail: The Keynesian Legacy of Inflation’, Cato Inst, ISBN 978-0932790064.
IMF, (2013), ‘Do Central Bank Policies Since the Crisis Carry Risks to Financial Stability?’, Global Financial
Stability Report, Chapter 3, 93 – 126, available at:
http://www.imf.org/External/Pubs/FT/GFSR/2013/01/pdf/c3.pdf
Joyce, M, Liu, Z and Tong, M (2014), ‘Institutional investor portfolio allocation, quantitative easing and the
global financial crisis’, Bank of Working Paper No. 510, available at:
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/Documents/workingpapers/2014/wp510.pdf
Khan, M and Senhadji, A (2001), ‘Threshold Effects in the Relationship between Inflation and Growth’, IMF
Staff Papers, Vol. 48, No. 1, pp. 1–21.
Keynes, J (1936), ‘The General Theory of Employment, Interest, And Money’, ISBN: 978-1494854744
Kimball, M (2015), ‘Confessions of a supply-side liberal’, selection of articles available at:
http://blog.supplysideliberal.com/
Kirby, S and Meaning, J (2015), ‘The Impacts of the Bank of England's Asset Purchases on the Public
Finances’, National Institute Economic Review May 2015 vol. 232
Kobayashi, T, and Muto, I (2013), ‘A Note On Expectational Stability Under Nonzero Trend Inflation’,
Macroeconomic Dynamics, 17, 681-693.
Kremer, S, Bick, A and Nautz, D (2013) ‘Inflation and Growth: New Evidence from a Dynamic Panel
Threshold Analysis’, Empirical Economics, Vol. 44, pp. 861–78.
Krugman, P (1997), ‘The Age of Diminished Expectations: US Economic Policy in the 1990s’, ISBN:
9780262611343
Krugman, P (2009), ‘The Return of Depression Economics and the Crisis of 2008’, ISBN: 978-0393337808.
Kurozumi, T (2014), ‘Trend inflation, sticky prices, and expectational stability’, Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Control, 42, 175-187.
Leigh, D (2010), ‘Monetary policy and the lost decade: Lessons from Japan’, Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking, 42(5), 833-857, available at:
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2009/wp09232.pdf
Mankiw, G (2009), ‘It May Be Time for the Fed to Go Negative’, New York Times (April 18).
http://www.nytimes.com/2009/04/19/business/economy/19view.html?_r=0
Mankiw, G and Reis, R (2002), ‘Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices: A Proposal to Replace the New
Keynesian Phillips Curve’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Volume 117, Issue 4, Pp. 1295-1328.
McLeay, M, Radia, A, and Thomas, R (2014), ‘Money creation in the modern economy’, Bank of England
Quarterly Bulletin, available at:
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/quarterlybulletin/2014/qb14q1prereleasemoneycre
ation.pdf

19

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

19

Rachel, L and Smith, T (forthcoming), ‘Secular drivers of the global real interest rate’, Bank of England
Working Paper.
Reifschneider, D, & Williams, J (2000), ‘Three lessons for monetary policy in a low-inflation era’, Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, 936-966, available at:
http://www.federalreserve.gov/PubS/feds/1999/199944/199944pap.pdf
Rogoff, K (2014), ‘Costs and benefits to phasing out paper currency’, National Bureau of Economic
Research, available at:
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20126
Roubini, N (2014), ‘Fiscal Policy’, In ‘What Have We Learned? Macroeconomic Policy after the Crisis’, IMF
and MIT Press, available at: https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/what-have-we-learned
Schmitt-Grohé, S and Martín, U (2010), ‘The Optimal Rate of Inflation’ in: Benjamin M. Friedman & Michael
Woodford (ed.), Handbook of Monetary Economics, edition 1, volume 3, chapter 13, pages 653-722 Elsevier.
Shiller, R (1997), ‘Why do people dislike inflation?’, In ‘Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy’ (pp. 1370), University of Chicago Press, available at:
http://www.nber.org/chapters/c8881.pdf
Shin, L (2015), ‘Why Bitcoin is no joke’, Forbes Magazine, available at:
http://www.forbes.com/sites/laurashin/2015/09/09/bitcoins-shared-ledger-technology-moneys-new-operatingsystem/
Sinclair, P (2003), ‘The optimal rate of inflation: an academic perspective’, Bank of England Quarterly
Bulletin, available at:
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/archive/Documents/historicpubs/qb/2003/qb030308.pdf
Taylor, J (1979), ‘Staggered wage setting in a macro model’, American Economic Review, 1979, vol. 69,
issue 2, pages 108-13.
Vayanos, D and Vila, J-L (2009), ‘A preferred-habitat model of the term structure of interest rates’, NBER
Working Paper No. 15487, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Weale, M and Wieladek, T. (2015), 'What are the macroeconomic effects of asset purchases?', CEPR
Discussion Paper No.10495, available at:
http://www.cepr.org/active/publications/discussion_papers/dp.php?dpno=10495
Wolf, M (2014), ‘The Shifts and the Shocks: What we've learned - and have still to learn - from the financial
crisis’, ISBN: 978-1846146978
Woodford, M (2001), ‘Fiscal requirements for price stability’, NBER Working Paper No. w8072, available at:
http://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/6894601.pdf
Yermack, D (2013), ‘Is Bitcoin a Real Currency? An economic appraisal’, NBER Working Paper No. 19747,
available at:
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19747
Yun, T (1996), ‘Nominal price rigidity, money supply endogeneity, and business cycles’, Journal of Monetary
Economics, Volume 37, Issue 2, April 1996, Pages 345–370.

20

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

20

Appendix
Chart 1: International policy rates since 2000
Higher than 5%
Between 1% and 3%
Less than zero

Chart 2: Global real rates since 1980
World Real Rate
Advanced Economies
Emerging Economies

Between 3% and 5%
Between 0% and 1%
Proportion of regions
100%

Long Run 'Real' Rates (Percent)
7
6
5

80%

4
60%
3

1980s average

2

40%

1
20%
0
-1

0%
2000

2005

2010

1980

2015

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Source: Thomson Reuters Datastream, CEIC and Bank calculations.
Note: Included regions are: Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, Euro
area, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, New Zealand, Norway,
Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan,
Thailand, UK and US. Together these countries account for
approximately 70% of PPP-weighted world GDP. Data are to August
2015.

Source: King and Low (2014); Bank Calculations.
Note: The ‘World’ real rate is taken from King and Low (2014) and
shows the average 10-year yield of inflation-linked bonds in the G7
countries (excluding Italy) over the period 1985-2013. It has been
extended back to the 1980s (dotted line) using a simple regression
linking it to movements in UK 10-year nominal yields and RPI inflation.
The red and blue lines are calculated as the nominal yield on 10-year
sovereign bonds minus 1-year ahead inflation expectations from
Consensus Economies. Figures have been GDP-weighted together for
20 advanced economies and 17 emerging markets.

Chart 3: International policy rates since 1970

Table 1: Policy rate loosening cycles across
countries

UK
USA
Japan
Germany

Percent
22

1970-2014

1994-2014

20
18

Country

Range

Duration

Range

Duration

United Kingdom

5.0

23.8

2.8

16.5

United States

5.4

19.8

3.0

13.8

Germany

4.5

49.8

3.1

48.5

Japan

5.9

77.3

-

-

SUM

5.2

42.7

3.0

26.3

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
1970 1974 1979 1983 1988 1992 1997 2002 2006 2011
Source: Datastream; Bank calculations.

Source: Bank calculations; Bank of England; Deutsche Bundesbank;
FRED database at St. Louis Fed.
Note: Monthly data. Loosening cycles are assigned to subsamples
according to the month of initial trough. Ranges are in percentage points
and durations in months.

21

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

21

Table 2: Cumulative recession probabilities

Chart 4: Forward real interest rate yield curves
United Kingdom (RPI-based)

Cum. recession probability

Horizon
(years)

UK

UK,US,
DE,JN

UK

1700-2014

1946-2014

29.0%

13.0%

1870-2014

Probability
of
interest
rate above
3%

Per cent
2.5

United States (CPI-based)

2.0

Germany / Euro area (HICP-based)

1.5
1.0
0.5

1

17.4%

0.4%

0.0
-0.5
-1.0

5

81.9%

50.3%

61.4%

34.9%

-1.5
-2.0

10

96.7%

75.3%

85.0%

-2.5

41.0%
0

5

10
15
Horizon (years)

20

25

Source: UK: One Bank Three Centuries of Macroeconomic Data. US,
Germany, Japan: Maddison, FRED.
Note: An annual recession is defined as negative annual growth. The
cumulative probability is the probability that there will be at least one
annual recession within a given horizon assuming that recessions
arrive according to a Bernoulli process. The probabilities that the
realised short-term interest rate will exceed 3% at different horizons
are estimated from the implied density function from options prices on
3-month LIBOR rates.

Source: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
Note: Data for the United Kingdom and the United States are derived
from nominal bond yields deflated using inflation swaps. The
Germany/EA figures are based on nominal Bund yield deflated using
euro-area inflation swaps (as a proxy for the euro-area risk free rate).
The measure of inflation used is RPI for the United Kingdom and CPI
for the United States and the euro area. Data are to 15 September
2015.

Chart 5: Inflation targets in advanced
economies, EMEs and NICs.

Chart 6 International inflation rates since 1960

Per cent
5
AE average (a)

AE average (a)

Higher than 5%
Between 3% and 5%
Between 1% and 3%
Between 0% and 1%

Proportion of countries
100%

EME and NIC average (a)
4

80%

3

60%

2

40%

1

20%

0

0%

EME and NIC average (a)

Note: (a) Averages comprise 9 countries in each grouping, each
accounting for approximately 34% of world PPP weighted GDP.

Source: Datastream and Bank calculations.
Note: Sample varies over time. Average sample sizes are: 30
countries between1960 and1980, 55 between 1980 and 2000 and 110
from 2000 onwards. Data are to July 2015.

22

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

22

Chart 7: Inflation expectations
5-year breakeven inflation rate, 5 years forward (a)
5-year ahead household inflation expectations (b)
2-year ahead household inflation expectations (b)
2-year ahead business economists' inflation expectations (b)
2-year ahead economists' CPI inflationexpectations (c)

Start of inflation
targeting

Inflation target
changes from
2.5% RPIX to
2.0% CPI

Bank of England
independence

Per cent
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

Source: Barclays, Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
Note: (a) Derived from index-linked gilts referenced to RPI. (b) Barclays Basix survey. Data do not refer to a specific inflation index. (c) Bank of
England Survey of External Forecasters. Financial markets data to 14 September 2015, survey data are to 2015Q3.

Chart 8: Satisfaction with the Bank and median
perceived inflation rate

Chart 9: Balance of public opinion about the
level of the inflation target

Differences from averages since 2000
(number of standard deviations) 2.0

Net balance (percentage points)
25

1.5

20

1.0

15

0.5

10

0.0
5
-0.5
0
-1.0
Median perceptions of
current inflation - inverted
Net satisfaction with the
Bank

-5

-1.5

-10

-2.0

-15

-2.5
Feb-00 May-02 Aug-04 Nov-06 Feb-09 May-11 Aug-13
Source: Quarterly Bank of England GfK Inflation Attitudes survey.
Note: (a) “Overall, how satisfied or dissatisfied are you with the way
the Bank of England is doing its job to set interest rates in order to
control inflation?” (b) “Which of these options best describes how
prices have changed over the last 12 months?” Data are to August
2015.

Feb-00 May-02 Aug-04 Nov-06 Feb-09 May-11 Aug-13
Source: Quarterly Bank of England GfK Inflation Attitudes survey.
Note: Respondents were asked the following question “The
Government has set an inflation target of 2%. Do you think this target
is too high, too low or about right?” Respondents who answered
‘about right’ and ‘no idea’ are not shown on the chart. Data are to
August 2015.

23

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

23

0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
-0.5
-0.6
-0.7
-0.8

Size of programme/GDP

BoE
BoJ
ECB
Fed
0%

5%

10%

15%

20%

Chart 10b: Change in short rates around selected
QE announcements
Change in 3yr yield (pp)

Change in 10yr yield (pp)

Chart 10a: Change in long rates around selected
QE announcements

0.15
0.1
0.05
0
Size of programme/GDP

-0.05
-0.1

BoE
BoJ
ECB
Fed

-0.15
-0.2
-0.25

25%

0%

5%

10%

15%

20%

25%

Chart 10c: Change in VIX around selected QE
announcements

Chart 10d: Change in effective exchange rates
around selected QE announcements

4
2
0
Size of programme/GDP

-2
-4
-6

BoE
BoJ
ECB
Fed

-8
-10
-12
0%

5%

10%

15%

20%

25%

Source: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
Note: Change in VIX over two day windows around QE events, against
size of announcement relative to that economy’s GDP at the time.
Does not control for expectations of QE announcements.

Change in effective
exchange rates (pp)

Source: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
Note: Change in 3 year spot market interest rates over two day
windows around QE events, against size of announcement relative to
that economy’s GDP at the time. Does not control for expectations of
QE announcements.

Change in VIX (pp)

Source: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
Note: Change in 10 year spot market interest rates over two day
windows around QE events, against size of announcement relative to
that economy’s GDP at the time. Does not control for expectations of
QE announcements.

1
0
Size of programme/GDP

-1
-2
-3

BoE
BoJ
ECB
Fed

-4
-5
0%

5%

10%

15%

20%

25%

Source: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
Note: Change in effective exchange rates over two day windows around
QE events, against size of announcement relative to that economy’s
GDP at the time. Does not control for expectations of QE
announcements.

Change in yield (pp)

Chart 10e: Change in corporate bond yields
around selected QE announcements
0.1
0.05
0
-0.05
-0.1
-0.15
-0.2
-0.25
-0.3
-0.35

Size of programme/GDP

BoE
BoJ
ECB
Fed
0%

5%

10%

15%

20%

25%

Source: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
Note: Change in investment grade corporate bond yields over two day
windows around QE events, against size of announcement relative to
that economy’s GDP at the time. Does not control for expectations of
QE announcements.

24

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

24

Chart 11: Estimated impacts of UK and US QE on UK GDP and inflation
UK response to 1% UK QE

US response to 1% US QE

Source: Weale and Wieladek (2015)
Note: The chart shows VAR impulse responses of real GDP and CPI in response to a one percent asset purchase announcement shock in terms
of 2009Q1 GDP. The shock has been identified with a Choleski identification scheme. As there is currently no consensus identification scheme to
identify QE shocks, this is only one out of four possible identification schemes proposed in Weale and Wieladek (2015). Due to this identification
uncertainty, they report an 0.3% average impact across these four different identification schemes.

Table 3: Estimates of QE impact from the empirical literature
Study

Episode

Real GDP

CPI

UK/US QE1

1.8% / 1.08%

1.5% / 0.84%

UK QE1

2.5%

1.5%

UK/US QE1

3.08% / 1.12%

4.2% / 1.2%

Giannone, Lenza, Pill and Reichlin (2014)

ECB Liquidity policy 2008/2009

2% in IP

N/A

Altavilla, Giannone and Lenza (2014)

ECB OMT Impact on Spain/Italy

2% / 1.5%

0.74% / 1.21%

Schenkelberg and Watzka (2013)

Japan QE1

0.5% in IP

No impact

Bank of Japan (2015)

Japan QE2

1-3%

0.6-1%

US QE2

0.39%

0.12%

Fed MBS + Liquidity policies

5%

3%

Gertler and Karadi (2013)

QE1 – MBS Purchases

3.5%

4%

Gertler and Karadi (2013)

QE1 – Sovereign Purchases

2.2%

3%

Baumeister and Benati (2012)
Kapetanios, Mumtaz, Stevens and Theodoris (2012)
Weale and Wieladek (2015)

Chen, Curdia and Ferrero (2012)
Del Negro, Eggertson, Ferrero and Kiyotaki (2015)

Note: This table shows the impact of unconventional monetary policies on real GDP and CPI estimated by various SVAR (the first seven) and
DSGE model (last four) studies.

25

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

25

Chart 12: Estimated impacts of BoJ QE on GDP and inflation
QE1: May 2003 – March 2008

QE2: April 2008 – February 2015

Source: Bank of England
Note: The impulse responses shown above are from a VAR model estimated on the series of actual JGB asset purchases by the Bank of Japan,
identified with a Choleski decomposition, where the variables were ordered CPI, monthly activity index (as proxy for GDP), asset purchases as a
fraction of Q2 2003/2008 GDP, the yield on the 10-year government bond and share prices divided by the CPI. The first panel suggests that QE1 in
Japan had an impact on real activity, but not prices, which is roughly in line with the survey in Ugai (2007). The multipliers in the second panel
suggest, once the total size of purchases is taken in account, a similar total impact as found in Bank of Japan (2015).

Chart 13: FX dynamics around selected QE announcements
Fed-USD

BoE-GBP

BoJ-JPY

ECB-EUR

Average

Announcement = 1
1.10

1.05

1.00

0.95

0.90

0.85
0
1
2
3
4
8
7
6
5 ECB, Federal
4
3
2 Bloomberg,
1
Sources:
Bank
of England,
Reserve,
Bank of Japan, Bank calculations.
Weeks from announcement

5

6

7

8

Source: Bank of England, ECB, Federal Reserve, Bloomberg, Bank of Japan, Bank Calculations

26

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

26

Chart 14: Estimated impacts of UK and US QE on UK GDP and inflation
UK response to 1% UK QE

UK response to 1% US QE

Source: Bank of England
Note: The first panel is taken from Weale and Wieladek (2015) as in chart 11. The second panel is the result from a 10 variable VAR model containing
the following variables: US CPI, US real GDP, US Asset purchase announcement scaled by 2009Q1 US GDP, the 10- year yield on US government
debt, US share prices scaled by US CPI, UK CPI, UK real GDP, UK Asset purchase announcement scaled by 2009Q1 UK GDP, the 10- year yield on
UK government debt, UK share prices scaled by UK CPI. We then apply a choleski decomposition to the variables listed in that order and examine the
impact of a one percent shock to the US asset purchase announcement on real GDP and CPI.

Chart 15: Decomposition of oil price movements
Percent
Demand

Supply

Unexplained

20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
-40

05/15

05/15

06/15

07/15

07/15

08/15

-50
09/15

Source: Datastream, Bank of England calculations.
Note: This decomposition of the Brent oil price is based on over
200 financial time series, mostly sector equity indices for major
oil producing and consuming countries. The pattern of price
movements is used to identify supply or demand shocks, e.g. if
consumer and oil equities rise simultaneously this would be
indicative of an increase in demand for oil.

27

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

27

