From lockdown to recovery - the economic effects of COVID-19
Speech given by
Professor Jonathan Haskel, External Member of the Monetary Policy Committee

Imperial Future Matters Online webinar
23 July 2020

My thanks to Nishat Anjum, Tom Belsham, Alan Castle, Gerald Cohen, Marco Garofalo, Jamie Lenney,
Elizabeth Levett, Jack Page, Emma Rockall, Michael Saunders, Matt Swannell, James Tasker and Marilyne
Tolle for their comments and assistance in preparation for this event. Errors and opinions are my own.

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

Good afternoon everyone and thank you for having me here today.
Around the world we’ve experienced one of the most dramatic slowdowns in economic activity in
recorded history. In the case of the UK, the second quarter of 2020 is almost certain to see by far the
largest decline in output since quarterly national accounts began. This talk will try to give some insight
into how economists have thought about and modelled the initial economic shock caused by
COVID-19 and some of things we are thinking about when modelling the recovery. Of course, here at
Imperial and elsewhere there are many distinguished scientists working to relieve the world of this
disease, including modelling work, and I want to try to relate some of the work economists have done
to their incredibly valuable work.
I want to make two main points.1
First, this was a huge and adverse shock to the economic system that required an unorthodox initial
modelling approach. Usually in economics there is a crucial role for prices to absorb the effect of
shocks and thereby trace their outcomes: a frost in Florida lowers the supply of orange juice, but
since prices rise, that lowers demand and so absorbs the shock. But with a lockdown prices cannot
adjust as freely, so we need a different modelling approach.
Second, the pandemic shock is a shock to public health. The resulting government-mandated
lockdown can be thought of as a “supply shock”: a closed restaurant for example can serve no one
and an opened one is now only able to serve, say, half its customers due to social distancing. But
equally important, the behavioural response of consumers can be thought of as a “demand shock”.
Evidence is emerging that the dominant driver of activity will in fact be on the demand side. When the
economy re-opens, customers might still fear infection and therefore stay away from consumption that
has a social element to it (pubs, restaurants etc.). It seems likely that such demand weakness will
therefore drag on the economy and hold back the recovery. The path of recovery crucially depends
therefore on the fear of infection, which in turn depends on the mix of public (e.g. track and trace) and
private (e.g. screens in shops) health measures undertaken. It also depends on the fear, or
realisation, of unemployment, as weak activity and capacity constraints on the operation of surviving
businesses, and insolvencies, translate into a fall in the demand for labour.

Whilst this speech was in its near-final draft I read an excellent speech by my colleague Silvana Tenreyro that, whilst independently written,
overlaps in many ways. See Tenreyro (2020).
2
1

1. Covid-19 – modelling the initial shock
1. Shocks to the economy
The usual approach to modelling shocks to the economic system is to (a) identify the shock (for
example an unexpected change in interest rates) and (b) analyse the mechanisms by which the
economy responds to that shock. In particular, it is important to assess whether these mechanisms
either amplify or absorb the shock’s effect on the economy.
To most people, the most intuitive account of the economy’s response to a shock is amplification. The
amplification effect is, many would say, a natural outcome of a network of billions of economic
relations typical of any modern specialised and decentralised economy. A restaurant closes. How is
that shock amplified? That restaurant stops buying food which is bad news for the farming industry.
Nor does it have any need for accounting services or cleaners, which is bad news for the business
services industry. And it doesn’t need staff – bad news for the local labour market.
There is however, an offsetting, “shock-absorbing” (or self-righting) effect. Maybe there are rival
restaurants to whom farmers can sell, accountants can audit, or workers can apply to. Or maybe the
restaurant industry is making low returns, and higher returns can be made by converting the premises
into a nursery which needs food, accounting, cleaning and staff.
In this second account, prices act as shock-absorbers, reallocating the quantities in the first account.
If the restaurant industry is making low returns, but the delivery industry is booming, prices provide
the signal to reallocate resources away from restaurants. If wages are low in the restaurant industry,
workers might choose to work elsewhere. Any economy is continually being hit by shocks of various
kinds: new technology, fashions and trends and opportunities to trade. No computer could possibly
compute the reallocation necessary and so the job is done, in this account, anonymously by the price
system which absorbs these shocks by signalling where economic resources need to go.
2. The COVID shock and Input-Output analysis
The COVID shock however is unusual in that much of the reallocation mechanism (at least initially)
was shut down through lockdowns and social distancing measures. Prices couldn’t readily adjust and
firms couldn’t switch to other industries because the economy was locked down.

3

Table 1: A snapshot of the UK supply and use table (2017)

Source: ONS, author calculations.
Note: All values have been normalised by GDP. This table reports values at basic prices that excludes taxes on final goods.

How then do we model the economy under these circumstances? The best model looks like the
amplification model as the consequence of the closure of, say, restaurants, “cascades” through the
rest of the economy. It turns out we had an ideal data set with which to assess the Covid shock,
namely the “input-output” tables collected by the Office for National Statistics (ONS, see here). These
tables provide a wonderful overview of the economy by mapping and quantifying industries by the
amounts of goods and services they supply to, and demand from, each other. Table 1 provides an
aggregated summary2 for what this looks like for the UK. The columns show supply, and the rows
show use i.e. the columns show what inputs each industry requires to produce and rows shows the
sources of demand for each industry.
Let’s start with agriculture in the top row. It’s easier to look at the second cell, which tells you that
0.9% of GDP’s worth of agricultural production goes from agriculture into production. Since production
includes manufacturing and food processing (e.g. ready meals), this tells you that the agriculture
sector is supplying the food processing sector, which makes sense. In the first cell, 0.3% GDP’s
worth goes to agriculture itself, which tells you that agriculture uses some of its own output as input,
subcontracting for example. Each row in the main body of the table gives the supply of each
industry/product to other industries. The penultimate column gives final demand – supplies that go
directly to consumers, not other producers. Thus the final column tells you the total demand for each
sector, which is the supply to other producers and supply to consumers.

2

Practically one would use a much more granular table that divides the economy into at least 64 product or industry combinations.
4

As you will know, GDP nets out the producer/producer supplies to avoid double-counting output.
Thus the panel on the bottom right tells you that for every £100 of GDP, the economy produces
£227.90 of goods, of which £35.40 is imported. We can also see that the logistics, hotels and
restaurants demand significant amounts of intermediate goods from the production industries or that
hotels and restaurants are primarily producers of final goods, as opposed to goods produced for the
benefit of other industries.
More detailed versions of table 1 can be constructed and used to map3 demand shocks through the
supply chain like the cascade we described earlier for restaurants. For example Figure 1 shows the
impact of a 90 percent fall in demand for accommodation and food services. We see that the effect of
this shock propagates to other sectors through the input-output linkages as the fall in demand for
hotels moves upstream to its suppliers. I should emphasise this is only the first-order impact of the
shock and so does not account for demand channels through lost employment or price changes. But
as I already stated a lot of these channels have been shut down for now.
Figure 1: Input-Output mapping of a 90 percent demand shock to accommodation and food
services

Source: ONS, author calculations
Note: Figure displays the first order impact through the 2016 input-output table multipliers of a 90 percent shock to demand
for accommodation and food services.

By mapping the lockdown to final demand in each individual sector this input-output approach helped
us to calibrate our estimate of the initial fall in output due to Covid-19 which we published in the May
Monetary Policy Report. Based on a range of indicators, we thought GDP might decline by 3% in
2020 Q1 and 25% in 2020 Q2, with the fall in Q2 representing by far the sharpest contraction since

3

I’ve posted a spreadsheet here if you are curious and would like to have a go yourself.
5

quarterly national accounts records began. We have now been able to observe official estimates of
output through May 2020, which indicate the level of economic activity in May was about 25% lower
than in 2019Q4, close to what we had anticipated. The blue bars in Figure 2 show the output falls
across industries and indicate a broad and marked decline in output across sectors, with the sectors
hardest hit corresponding to those most affected by social distancing rules.
Figure 2: Decline in output and furloughed workers since 2019Q4

Source: HMRC, ONS
Note: Fall in the level of real gross value between 2019 Q4 and May 2020 as estimated by the ONS.
Furloughed refers to cumulative claims under the JRS and SEISS relative to the level of employment in that industry in the 3
months to December 2019.

The falls in output so far have coincided with an equally dramatic fall in active employment, with a
significant proportion of workers in each industry furloughed under the government’s schemes for
employed (CJRS) and self-employed (SEISS) workers. We see in Figure 2 that the numbers of
workers furloughed corresponds relatively closely to the declines in output in each industry. At this
point in time these workers are not unemployed but temporarily absent from work which in part
explains why the headline Figure for the unemployment rate remains 3.9 percent.
However the labour market data and other indicators (released on 16th July 2020) point to troubling
times ahead. Indicators such as the PAYE data from HMRC indicate employment through PAYE is
down by around 650 thousand since March. We have also seen a significant uptick in claims for job
seekers allowance and universal credit with ONS experimental statistics showing a rise of 1.4 million
claims for job seekers allowance or work-related universal credit claims since the start of March.
These numbers alone indicate the potential for the unemployment rate to rise above levels seen after
6

the financial crisis, when the official unemployment rate peaked at 8.5 percent in 2011. It would also
seem likely that as the furlough schemes wind down, workers currently furloughed will further add to
the numbers already unemployed. It is notable that around 30% of furloughed workers think it’s at
least “quite likely” they will lose their job, as reported in the 2020H1 NMG survey.
3. A disparate impact across workers
Figure 2 highlights the disparity of the incidence of the lockdown across sectoral activity, with labourintensive sectors such as hospitality worst affected. We do not yet have the official labour market data
to paint a picture of how different types of workers have been affected by the lockdown. But it is
possible to get a sense of the incidence of the economic hardship on worker types by documenting
their relative reliance on the government’s subsidy schemes.
HMRC data on claims received for the CJRS and SEISS schemes shows that the young are
particularly exposed to the shutdown sectors. Figure 3 shows that take-up of the furlough schemes
has been concentrated in those aged 16 to 24, with 45% of that age group benefiting from the
schemes, compared with only 25% of those aged 35 to 54. The disparity across men and women is
perhaps not as stark as might be expected, with both groups experiencing furlough take-up rates of
about 25-30%.
Figure 3: Take-up of furlough schemes by age and gender

Source: HMRC
Note: Figure shows the percentage share of jobs furloughed under the
Coronavirus Job Retention Scheme and Self-Employment Income Support
Scheme relative to HMRC’s estimates of the number of eligible jobs for the
furlough schemes. The Figure reflects claims received up until June 30th.

7

A great disparity also appears across income levels. About 35 percent of the lowest earners worked in
shutdown sectors4 before Covid-19 hit, compared with only 5 percent of the highest earners. Put
differently, workers in the bottom tenth of the earnings distribution are seven times more likely to work
in shutdown sectors than those in the top tenth of the distribution (Figure 4).
Figure 4: Share of employees in shutdown sectors by
individual earnings
Share in shutdown sectors (%)

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

1

2

3

4
5
6
7
8
Decile of individual earnings

9

10

Source: Institute of Fiscal Studies, BN278, Figure 2, based on Quarterly Labour
Force Survey Q1-Q4 2019, Waves 1 and 5 only. Employees only; excludes
workers in full-time education.

Figure 5: Proportion of employees who have experienced job changes since the coronavirus
outbreak, by employee earnings quintile prior to the outbreak (6-11 May 2020)
1 (lowest paid)

25%

2

5%

20%

3

2%

17%

4

7%

5 (highest paid)

6%

4%

3% 2%
Furloughed

2% 3%
3%

3%

Lost job

7%

Lost hours and pay
due to coronavirus

All employees

15%
0%

5%

3%
10%

15%

4%
20%

25%

30%

35%

Source: Resolution Foundation, A new settlement for the low paid, June 2020. Figure 2. Based on analysis of YouGov,
Adults aged 18 to 65 and the coronavirus (COVID-19).
Notes: Base = all UK adults aged 18-65 who had an employee job prior to the coronavirus outbreak, and provided
information on their usual earnings prior to the coronavirus outbreak (apart from for the ‘all employees’ category).
Earnings quintiles are based on net (take-home) usual employee pay prior to the coronavirus outbreak. ‘Furloughed’ and
‘lost job’ relate to employees’ main job; ‘lost hours and pay due to coronavirus’ captures employees not in either of these
first two groups who are working fewer hours than their usual hours before the coronavirus outbreak, which they state
has happened for coronavirus-related reasons, and who have also experienced decreases in earnings.

4

See Sector shutdowns during the coronavirus crisis: which workers are most exposed: Institute of Fiscal Studies Briefing Note BN278.
Shutdown sectors are: non-food, non-pharmaceutical retail; passenger transport; accommodation and food; travel; childcare; arts and
leisure except ‘artistic creation’; personal care; ‘funeral and related activities’; domestic services.
8

And an online survey commissioned by the Resolution Foundation in early May shows that workers
on low-pay have been hit the hardest, with 33% of the bottom fifth of earners having lost their jobs,
been furloughed or lost hours and pay, compared with only 15% for the top-fifth of earners
(Figure 5).5
4. Can affected workers weather the storm?
a. Household insurance and working from home
How will these workers weather the storm? Some workers in shutdown sectors can rely on the
incomes of other household members whose jobs are not affected by lockdown. For instance, over
half of under-25s working in shutdown sectors live with their parents.6 And more than half of the
lowest income-earners working in shutdown sectors have a spouse or parent whose job is not directly
affected by the lockdown and who has higher earnings. In these households, a smaller fraction of total
household earnings comes from the shutdown sectors, which helps to cushion the financial blow, but
by no means offsets it entirely.
We can look at other metrics of resilience. For instance, to what extent can these workers work from
home? As you would expect from the high furloughing rates in the shutdown sectors, the answer is
very little. Analysis by the Resolution Foundation using the distribution of weekly pay shows that being
able to work from home is very much the prerogative of highly-paid workers (Figure 6).7

See https://www.resolutionfoundation.org/app/uploads/2020/06/A-new-settlement-for-the-low-paid.pdf
See https://www.ifs.org.uk/uploads/BN278-Sector-shutdowns-during-the-coronavirus-crisis.pdf.
7
See https://www.resolutionfoundation.org/app/uploads/2020/03/Doing-what-it-takes.pdf.
5
6

9

Figure 6: Share of employees who can work from home if
needed, by gross weekly pay vigintile (2014-2018)
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Lowest paid <<< Weekly pay vigintile >>> highest
Source: Resolution Foundation, Doing what it takes, March 2020, Figure 1.
Note: pay vigintiles defined within each calendar year. Pay is usual gross pay.

b. Financial buffers
What about financial buffers? Can workers exposed to the shutdown sectors smooth through the
shock by drawing down savings to support consumption?
Before I address this question, let me give you some sense of the saving buffers of the average
household. Data from the 2020H1 NMG survey tell us that the median household sets aside £125 a
month, has access to £5,000 in deposits and £6,500 in total savings.
But those headline Figures conceal a great deal of disparity across households’ employment status.
Figure 7a shows that, setting aside retirees (the “inactive”) who have ample savings, the unemployed
and those who have been furloughed have access to no stock of savings or half the median amount,
respectively. Both employed and self-employed households do better than the median, with access to
£5-7,000 and £10-12,500 of savings respectively. So self-employed households tend to have some of
the highest savings, which affords them some measure of resilience to the Covid shock if it is shortlived.
Another metric of household financial resilience is the share of households who report no savings at
all, whether as a flow or a stock. By this measure, the 2020H1 NMG survey tells us that slightly less
than one in three households reported no flow of savings, and one-fifth reported no stock of savings
(either deposits or total savings). But, again, the unemployed were much more likely to report both no
flow and no stock of savings, with roughly half of them doing so (Figure 7b). And furloughed workers
were marginally more likely to report no stock of savings than the employed and self-employed
households.
10

Figure 7a: Median deposits and total savings
by employment status

Figure 7b: Share of households with no
savings by employment status

£35,000
Median deposits
Median total savings

£30,000
£25,000
£20,000

60%
Zero total savings

50%

Zero deposits
Zero monthly savings

40%
30%

£15,000
£10,000
£5,000
£0

20%
10%
0%

Source: NMG Survey 2020H1
Survey of 6,011 households conducted online between 6 and 28 April 2020. Total savings are deposits plus other investments.

c. Savings under lockdown
Workers are consumers and consumer spending accounts for about 70% of the UK economy. So the
consumption and saving decisions of workers will play a crucial role in shaping the recovery and the
response of policymakers to support it.
The social distancing measures introduced in late March, and now being gradually unwound, have
had dramatic effects on households’ consumption and saving behaviour. Households have been
unable to spend on social activities – eating out, going on holiday and to museums. Work-related
consumption, such as spending on transport and fuel, has also fallen. And households have also
postponed spending on “delayables” such as furniture, cars and clothing. Spending on staples – food
and drink, utilities – which make up about half of UK consumption, has not risen enough to offset
those falls. So overall consumption spending has fallen substantially.8 At the same time, relative to the
declines in consumer spending, incomes have been somewhat maintained, either through working
from home or through the government’s wage subsidy scheme for those who have been furloughed.
So one peculiarity of the Covid-19 downturn is the prevalence of “forced” or “involuntary” savings, with
marked differences across the income distribution.

8

See Chart 3.2 of the May 2020 Monetary Policy Report.
11

Figure 8: Estimate of money not spent as a result of the lockdown by household income
quintile
£ per household per week

£400

Entertainment (100%); sport (75%)
£300
Clothing (25%); hair & beauty
(100%); household goods (25%)

£200

Eating & drinking out (100%)

£100

Travel & transport (75%); vehicles
(25%)

£0
Bottom fifth

Second Middle fifth Second
lowest fifth
highest fifth

Top fifth

Holiday & accommodation (100%)

Source: Figure 1 from ‘Excess saving’ in lockdown: a big new economic challenge”, 31 May 2020, New Policy Institute.
Based on the authors’ analysis of the Living Costs and Food Survey, 2018-19. The percentages refer to the proportion of
each type of spending assumed to no longer being spent during the lockdown.

Figure 8 provides estimates of money not spent per household per week as a result of the lockdown,
across quintiles of the income distribution. The top-fifth household will have “saved” roughly £320 per
week, almost seven times as much as a household in the bottom fifth of the income distribution.
I have put “saved” in inverted commas because a variable fraction of the money not spent on social
activities and transport will have been spent on staples and debt repayments. That is particularly true
for households at the bottom of the income distribution, who are more likely to have suffered income
losses, forcing them to run down any savings and turn to the government for income support, such as
Universal Credit.
Evidence from the latest Bank of England/Ipsos Mori Survey shows a stark difference between the
lowest and the highest earners in their saving response to the Covid-19 shock. The survey breaks out
the net balance of households that increased savings, by household income. Low- and medianincome households reported their savings have decreased, while above-median and high-income
households reported an increase (Figure 9a).
The same survey also looks at the net balance of households that increased savings in response to
the Covid shock, by employment status. Again, there is a marked disparity across employment
cohorts, with a net balance of 18-28% of self-employed households reporting a decline in savings,
compared with reports of broadly unchanged savings by full-time employees (Figure 9b).
So, against the backdrop of their above-median saving buffers, as reported earlier in the NMG survey,
the self-employed have been decreasing their savings in response to Covid.
12

It is not surprising. The self-employed are some of the most likely to have seen a fall in income as a
result of the containment measures. According to the NMG survey, while a net balance of 5% of those
in employment or inactive reported an income decline, a net balance of more than 60% of the selfemployed and furloughed employees reported a fall in income. Now, the fieldwork for the NMG survey
pre-dated the introduction of the self-employment income support scheme (SEISS) on 13 May, so it
could be that a slightly smaller net balance of self-employed is now reporting a fall in income.
Figure 9a: Change in savings by low and
high earners
25

Net balance increased savings (%)

Figure 9b: Change in savings by employment
status
10

20

18-20 May

5

15

29 May - 3 Jun

0

10

3-6 Jul

Net balance increased savings (%)

-5

5

-10

0

-15

-5

-20

-10

-25

-15

-30

18-20 May
29 May - 3 Jun
3-6 Jul

-35

Source: BoE/Ipsos Mori survey. The question asked is “As a result of the measures taken around the coronavirus pandemic,
would you say that your household savings have increased, decreased, or stayed the same? Net balances are
simple/unweighted, calculated as e.g. (increased a lot + increased a little) – (decreased a lot + decreased a little).
Research for this survey was carried out by Ipsos MORI on behalf of the Bank of England. It surveyed a nationally
representative quota sample of over 2,200 adults in the United Kingdom aged 16–75 using its online i:omnibus for each
wave. Data have been weighted to the known offline population proportions for age, gender, government office region,
working status and social grade.

13

2. Modelling the recovery
We have seen then a model that describes the downturn and the very heterogeneous experience
across sectors and individuals. What about the recovery?
Those attempting to model the recovery have drawn various pictures, such as in Figure 11.
Figure 11: Shapes of the recovery?

Understandably, this has been labelled as corresponding to various letters of the alphabet. It’s worth
reminding ourselves that the correspondence to a “V” for example depends very much on how one
draws the scale of the x-axis. In the May MPR, we described a scenario with a very sharp downturn
and incomplete recovery over several years like the blue line in Figure 11. This blue line is clearly not
a V though but if you zoom out far enough then it will start to look more and more like a V. So let us
ask: what factors may determine whether we experience the red or blue line: what forces drive GDP
growth faster or slower and what happens to inflation?
So far we have discussed how the input-output approach helped us forecast what would happen
under lockdown, which as it turned out, was not such a bad approach given subsequent economic
data. This approach worked well because the lockdown was in part a large forced shutdown in final
demand, where many of the normal adjustment mechanisms through prices were at least temporarily
shut down.
If this model is right, then the release of lockdown should reverse the cascade, resulting in a full and
V-shaped recovery. Therefore once demand is allowed to recover, according to this model, the
economy will restore itself to the status quo ante.
While a useful and intuitive framework, the I-O approach has some weaknesses. There is little
account of how demand might return to the economy other than the assumption of releasing
14

lockdown. What about prices? In this I-O setup, restaurants use fixed amounts of food and
accountancy services and hence a fall in demand cascades down via this ratio. Yet anyone with a
working knowledge of economics will know that supply and demand are brought into balance by
prices rising and falling, which in turn are the signals for consumers and firms to buy and sell more or
less.
In the light of this, economists do not tend to use these I-O models. Rather, they focus on the role of
the price system, and the individual decisions9 of economic agents concerning consumption and
saving.
1. Representative Agent New Keynesian (RANK) models
Given the focus on heterogeneity in the previous section it may surprise you that most of these
models feature little or no heterogeneity amongst firms and workers. The textbook models of
macroeconomics tend to rely on what is called a “representative agent” framework10.
The dynamics in these models are driven by slow moving trends like technological progress and
population growth around which the economy sustains ‘shocks’, unanticipated events that throw the
economy off course and interact with frictions such as price and wage rigidity that mean the economy
takes time to self-correct. An important element in these models is “consumption smoothing”. An
impatient consumer planning their consumption over time prefers jam today rather than jam tomorrow.
But equally, they are unlikely to want to consume everything today and nothing tomorrow. Rather,
they will “smooth their consumption”: if they hit a temporary patch of low income they will try to run
down savings and build them up again when times are better.
2.

Supply and demand shocks

Economists like to broadly categorise shocks to the economy as either demand or supply shocks.
Demand shocks are events that change households demand for goods and services relative to some
baseline, often caused by changes in household confidence or unanticipated changes in income,
sometimes due to fiscal or monetary policy. Supply shocks are those shocks that raise or lower the
productive capacity of the economy.

Cochrane (2020) relates this point to SIR models used by epidemiologists. The points out the simplest SIR models takes the R number as
a given, defined by the fundamental transmissibility of the disease and deduces the spread of infection. But if economic agents respond to
the risk of infection by working less and consuming less then the R number is driven as well by individual choices.
10
It should be noted that in using these models, most policy institutions are not ignoring these other frictions or heterogeneity but analysing
those aspects alongside their main models which provide the central organising framework for policy analysis and forecasting. Furthermore
embedded in most policy institutions’ general equilibrium models, including the Bank of England’s (Burgess et al, 2013), are usually two
household types, constrained and unconstrained. The constrained are a fixed share of households cut off from financial markets and
therefore must consume all their income. This helps capture more accurately the response of the modelled economy to different shocks
(Gali, 2017).
15
9

So what is COVID-19? In my view it is best described as a “supply shock”. That is, it is a change to
the extent to which the economy can provide goods and services: restaurants must now be 1/2 full for
example. I will return to exactly what type of shock it is below.
Let us think of COVID-19 as a temporary supply shock, whereby some sectors are unable to supply
goods and services but we know that at some point these constraints will be released. What do our
standard models say? Remember that consumers wish to smooth consumption. If they expect to be
better-off tomorrow than today, then now is a good time to lower saving in order to maintain
consumption. Now, of course with a lockdown, they may simply be unable to buy what they want.
This means a combination of increased savings (involuntarily) and increased prices as consumers try
to buy more of what is in short supply. What happens when consumption restrictions are released?
Consumers confident in the return to pre-lockdown conditions will resume spending. Thus these
models would tend to predict a rather smooth recovery in line with the unwinding of the supply shock,
like the red line in Figure 11. As social distancing measures come off we should therefore anticipate a
quick and full recovery.

Figure 12: CHAPS payments

Figure 13: Consumer prices

Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
Note: CHAPS data is based on a sample of around 100 UK
companies payments received from their merchant
acquirers on a daily basis. These payments reflect the
sales that companies make through debit and credit card
purchases, which are summed to estimate rolling sevenday revenues. Social consumption includes corporate
revenues from hotels, restaurants, air travel and cultural
events. Delayable consumption includes household goods,
clothing, vehicle purchases and recreational goods. Work
related includes travel and fuel. Staples include housing,
food and health. Spending data shown through 16 July.

Source: ONS and Bank calculations
Note: Including the drag from fuel, prices of 'work-related
travel' items fell 5.4% since February relative to 2018-2019
trend. This chart excludes regulated prices such as tobacco,
water supply, sewerage collection and education which fell
2.4% since February relative to trend. *Delayable items
exclude audio-visual goods and purchase of vehicles.

16

Thus the “supply shock plus smoothing” models suggest that (a) we restore the economy when the
shock wears off and (b) that whilst supply is impaired there is inflation.
At first glance high-frequency payment indicators such as in Figure 12 below give some support to
this idea. It shows that spending on a number of consumer items has recovered (black line). That
looks like consumption is bouncing back.
We can get some more insight however by looking at changes in consumption and changes in price.
That gives a different picture (Figure 13): prices appear to have fallen.
So it doesn’t look like this supply shock is inflationary at the moment. That means that demand must
have fallen more than supply. Thus we cannot presume that restoring supply will be sufficient. We
have to figure out what will happen to demand.
To do this, we have to isolate the mechanisms that might cause this supply shock to become a
demand shock. There are at least two channels that could cause demand to be deficient as the
productive capacity of the UK economy returns: 1) Fear of infection and (2) fear of unemployment.
Both these channels will mean the recovery is likely to resemble more the blue than red line in the
Figure 11.
3. Fear of infection
To understand the demand implications of the supply shock, it is helpful, in my view, to describe
further the supply shock. Here’s one way of thinking about it.
For a pub to offer a valuable service it needs four main inputs. Three of them are eminently visible:
(1) intermediate inputs, the beer to be delivered, the sound system, lighting etc. (2) labour, such as
bar staff, and (3) capital, such as the building and fitments.
The fourth has only become salient with the pandemic and might be called “a healthy environment”.
Of course pubs have always had to have such an environment in the sense of clean kitchens, cellars
etc. But there was also the publically provided element of a safe environment, whereby one can think
of public health as being a part of publically provided infrastructure. The pandemic has both raised
that cost, since we need new medicines and the like, but also, in effect privatised it, by obliging private
businesses to install Perspex screens, enforce distancing etc.

17

Thus the “supply shock” is not just the collapse in the production of goods and services; it’s also the
collapse in the ability of the pub to supply “health” services, previously mostly publically provided.
Now, part of the incidence of that shock has fallen on private business. How then does this help us
think about how the supply shock turns into a demand shock? It does so because potential
customers might quite reasonably worry about the health safety of their destination and so releasing
from lockdown might not hasten demand recovery if consumers remain worried.11 Can we get a
sense of how big this effect is?
Let us return to the high-frequency payment data we looked at earlier.
Figure 12 breaks down payments data by category. You can see that spending on staples, after a
sharp uptick in late March and compensatory fall in April, rose above pre-Covid levels in May and
June. That points to some substitution away from social spending, which now stands close to 60%
below its pre-Covid level as people shun going out and stay home. Spending on “delayables” has
been rising too, and is now exceeding its pre-Covid level.
But these data don’t tell us what is driving the spending recovery. Maybe people are consuming more
because lockdown measures have been gradually lifted. Maybe they’re consuming more because
infection rates have come down and they feel more confident going out. Yes, lifting the lockdown is a
necessary condition for people to resume social spending, but is it sufficient? How can we identify the
relative effects of voluntary versus mandatory social distancing? Eyeballing Figure 12 does not allow
us to disentangle effects.
So what evidence do we have on voluntary and mandatory measures?
The most obvious thing to do is simply to ask people about their worries. Figure 14 shows data from
the latest ONS Impact survey, which asked about the fraction of individuals who are comfortable/very
comfortable and uncomfortable/very uncomfortable about eating out, indoors and outdoors, in the
sample week and week before. A clear majority are uncomfortable about eating inside at least.

Similarly, Hacioglu et al (2020) find that the bulk of the fall in consumption in the UK started from the second week of March, before the
imposition of the national lockdown on 23 March.
18
11

Figure 14: Attitudes to Eating Out
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
How comfortable How comfortable How comfortable How comfortable
eating indoors at eating indoors at eating outdoors at eating outdoors at
a restaurant this a restaurant last a restaurant this a restaurant last
week?
week?
week?
week?
Uncomforable or very uncomfortable

Comfortable or very comfortable

Source: ONS survey, 8-12 July

Figure 15: Recovery in social spending and the risk environment

Source: Google and Bank calculations
Note: The Google Search data is taken from Google Trends. The “social spending” indicator is a composite of a number of
terms, including items such as “café”, “bar”, “restaurant”, etc. Our indicator is an index and the shortfall is calculated as the
% deviation of June 2020 search volumes from June 2019 search volumes.

Let us turn next to cross-country data. Figure 15 plots the shortfall of consumer interest in eating out
(proxied by the deficit of Google searches for “restaurants” and the like relative to last year) measured
in June against the prevalence of the virus (captured by Covid-19 deaths) in the week before
lockdowns were eased. Notice the shape of the scatter and the timing of the data points. You can see
that the deadlier the environment before mandatory lockdowns were lifted, the lesser consumer
interest in social spending now. The UK is a case in point, having relaxed its official lockdown amidst
high virus prevalence, and exhibiting the largest shortfall in social spending intent amongst all
countries in the sample. But even in countries that had a lower death count before lifting lockdowns,

19

for instance South Korea, China and Japan, social spending interest remained depressed relative to
pre-Covid. This points to a risk of persistence in consumer risk-aversion and spending activity.
Figure 16: Eating out in Texas

A second piece of evidence is in a specific location, namely Texas and Figure 16 shows the story.
From 13 March to 2 April, the US federal government and local authorities declared a state of
emergency and imposed lockdowns in Texas, whereupon restaurant bookings fell to zero. From
1 May, restaurants reopened but with dining-in capacity constraints. Those were lifted from 25% on
1 May to 75% on 12 June, which coincided with a continuous pickup in bookings until a peak in
mid-June. From that peak, bookings started to fall consistently, concomitant with a sharp uptick in
cumulative Covid-19 cases. On 26 June, the governor of Texas announced a reduction of indoor
restaurant seating capacity to 50% from 75% and closed bars other than for take-away, effective
29 June.
Since 26-29 June, bookings have fallen further but at a slower pace than commensurate with the
steady rise of Covid-19 cases. This suggests that patrons’ reluctance to dine out is abating, perhaps
because of relatively greater confidence in the provision of a safe indoor environment following the
governor’s announcement, (but also, perhaps, reflecting anecdotal evidence of increasing availability
in outdoor seating capacity.)
This Texan case study suggests that consumer behaviour responds not just to the prevalence of the
virus, as measured by the number of Covid cases, but also to the provision of a safe environment by
both the public and private sectors.

20

Finally, I turn to more formal econometric evidence (Goolsbee and Syverson (2020)). The authors use
US mobile phone data to track movements of people to business locations. They exclude
manufacturing but look at visits to, for example, shops, theatres and gyms, where location is a
meaningful indicator of consumer activity. The US has seen widely differing experiences across
counties of lockdowns and releases from lockdowns. Thus they can compare county A, which has
released from lockdown, with adjacent county B, which has not, but both face the same death rate. If
foot traffic recovered in county A, then this would suggest that exiting the lockdown, not fear of
infection, would be driving behaviour.
Their main finding is that of the measured 60% fall in consumer traffic, only 7% was estimated to be
due to official lockdowns. Rather, consumer visits are strongly correlated with the number of local
Covid deaths, which suggests that fear of infection is driving consumer behaviour (similar to the visual
impression from the Texas data).
4. Fear of unemployment
I’ve discussed how our standard models are built around a single representative household, yet we
also know this economic shock has had a highly heterogeneous impact on sectors and households.
Some household have lost their jobs, many of whom will be on lower incomes with little savings. Many
more fear the prospect of losing their job once the furlough schemes end or might feel insecure
working from home. Therefore it might be important to dispense with our representative household in
order to properly model the prospects for the recovery.
Since the Global Financial Crisis, there has been an expansion of and innovations to another class of
models: Heterogeneous Agent New Keynesian (HANK) models. As you might suspect, HANK models
build on the New Keynesian assumption of price and wage rigidity, by modelling the distribution of
household income and wealth with incomplete financial markets12. In these models individual
households’ decisions are contingent on their wealth, income, access to financial markets, liquidity of
their assets and government policy. Other modellers have gone on to introduce labour-market
frictions, such as search-and-matching frictions, meaning that individuals worry about the risk of
unemployment and finding a new job, which in turn varies with the business cycle. Finally there are
also models that emphasise heterogeneous firms and sectors, and input-output linkages between
them.

Incomplete credit markets mean that some households cannot borrow to insure against unemployment risk. Households are constrained
in their ability to insure themselves against individual risk e.g. there may be limit to how much they can borrow.
21
12

This class of models tends to be quite intuitive in its description of the economy and the effects of
macroeconomic policy relative to RANK models. For example in HANK models, contrary to RANK
models, monetary policy works as much through its indirect, general-equilibrium effects on income
and employment, as it does by direct spending responses to changes in interest rates (Kaplan &
Violante, 2018; for an extension of these models into models incorporating fears of infection, see
Kaplan, Moll & Violante 2020). The basic intuition is that credit-constrained households cannot
smooth consumption by borrowing, so their spending decisions depend in part on current income from
employment.
Furthermore, these household need not be asset-poor. Wealthy households, who hold a large share
of their wealth in illiquid assets such as housing, are also a driver in these models. HANK models also
create a larger role for fiscal policy as credit -constrained households are likely to be more responsive
to changes to taxes or transfers than wealthy households. In the RANK model however, wealth is
pooled and so transfers, taxes and borrowing net out to zero within the household.
So what can these models tell us about the risks we face as we enter the recovery?
1. Wealth distribution
The disproportionate exposure of the young, self-employed and low income households to the job
losses and reduction in income related to Covid-19 gives a much more Keynesian flavour to the
prospects for any recovery. That is to say, the fortunes of these households is going to depend upon
aggregate demand in the economy as these households tend to have lower savings and spend a
higher share of their incomes. Models that capture the wealth distribution and its interactions with
consumption and labour supply will be useful for understanding the effects of monetary and fiscal
policy on these households.
2. Unemployment
An important channel that these models can help describe is the interaction between job uncertainty
and the need for precautionary savings. Job uncertainty can take two forms: the risk of job loss or the
risk of poor job-finding prospects once unemployed. A feedback loop can develop where a rise in the
risk of unemployment causes workers to save more for precautionary reasons. This rise in demand
for saving amplifies the effects of the initial shock, supply or demand, and provides a mechanism for a
supply shock to morph into a demand shock13 14.

In some sense, this is also everyone’s model of the economy. In the I-O model, there is a mechanical relation whereby low demand
cascades down to lower demand along the supply chain.
22
13

These models capture a behavioural response whereby the fear of poor economic prospects, and
related precautionary economic behaviour sustains low demand. When a negative shock hits, people
worry about their own future and employment prospects, which leads to an increase in desired
savings and lower demand. Notice that this model is in contrast to a standard approach where the
onset of bad times, if perceived as temporary, is a time to reduce savings in order to smooth
consumption. This stabilises the effects of the shock as opposed to amplifying it.
Figure 17: Supply shock amplification in a heterogeneous agent model with labour market frictions

Note: Graph shows the response of macroeconomic variables to a persistent supply shock. The blue line is the response in
a model of Ravn and Sterk (2020) which includes incomplete markets, sticky wages and search and matching frictions. The
orange line is a similar model but with complete markets and no labour market frictions, and reflects the textbook New
Keynesian response to a supply shock. The models have been parametrized to be the same along all other dimensions and
produce the same steady states. The output gap is output relative to what output would be in a frictionless version of the
model i.e no price or wage rigidity or labour market frictions.

To see if this makes an appreciable difference, Figure 17 illustrates the responses to a supply shock
in a model based on that of Ravn and Sterk (2020) that includes incomplete markets and
unemployment risk (HANK&SAM), and compares it to the more orthodox New Keynesian response to
a supply shock. The panel shows the responses of output, unemployment and inflation following an
illustrative negative shock to supply (Total Factor Productivity).

Another related model is that of Guerrieri et al (2020) which demonstrate how sectoral heterogeneity and household heterogeneity can
combine to produce instances of supply shocks that ultimately result in inefficiently low demand.
23
14

Under the HANK&SAM simulation, the response of output is amplified beyond the effect of the initial
shock due to a rise in unemployment. The persistent rise in unemployment, and crucially
unemployment risk, pushes down on household demand, which in turn pushes down on inflation. In
the baseline New Keynesian model the supply shock pushes down on unemployment as firms hire
more workers to try to meet unchanged demand, which in turn pushes up on inflation through higher
labour costs. For the monetary policymaker the difference is important. In the baseline RANK model
the supply shock has created a positive output gap and higher inflation, whereas in the HANK&SAM
model we have a negative output gap and lower inflation.
3. Policy and prospects
In recent months I have voted for more accommodative monetary policy. As I have tried to set out, in
Haskel (2019) for example, I am concerned about the economy “getting stuck” and recovering only
slowly and undershooting the inflation target.
Regarding the current downturn, I believe the I-O models were very helpful in modelling the
magnitude and incidence of the decline. As for the recovery, I would put weight on the logic that
suggests that as a behavioural response to the supply shock, cautious consumers, worried about
unemployment and health risks, will hold back the economy. In addition to that, the heterogeneous
response means each individual’s economic fortunes depend strongly on the general behaviour of
other consumers in the economy in a way that, without policy, may not be self-correcting.
If the worries about infection are an important determinant of behaviour, then the evolution of the
economy likely depends on the provision of “health” services, both public (e.g. track/trace) and
privately (e.g. screens in shops).15 To the extent these services are privately provided, then I would
expect to see a new wave of competition and innovation as firms compete by offering safe
environments. To the extent these services are publically provided, there is a crucial link between the
economy and such provision in at least two ways. First, the economy will crucially depend on the
provision and understanding of high quality local information on infection by the health and statistical
authorities. Second, the social returns to developing a cheap, fast and non-invasive test will be
enormous. 16,17 This multiple set of interactions will be key to determining the path of the recovery.

For example, in the UK, theatres are closed. In South Korea, the theatre showing Phantom of the Opera is open. Patrons are tested and
have to wear masks, but seating is at full capacity. At the same time South Korea has strict quarantining and track and trace system,
enforced by the civil authorities. In other words, both the theatre and public sector have supplied health services.
16
For example, Eichenbaum et al (2020) study a model where workers decide whether to consume and go to work but those activities
involve human contact and hence some chance of catching the disease. Lockdown stops contacts and the disease, but stops economic
activity. The economy recovers as herd immunity is built up and, eventually, consumption and work are restored. In an extension
Eichenbaum (2020) considers a model where agents don’t know if they are infected and can choose to take a test. They typically show very
large benefits from quarantining the sick relative to locking everyone down.
17
A third point is the social and political interactions between testing and quarantining. For example, Eichenbaum et al (2020) point out that
with no, or ineffective quarantine policies, an agent who tests positive can still work and consume. Indeed, other things equal, they have
every incentive to do so, since they cannot catch the disease. However, the non-infected realise this is so and thus, correctly, work out that
24
15

References
Bank of England (2020). Monetary Policy Report, May 2020.
Bangham, G. and Leslie, J. (2020). Rainy Days. An audit of household wealth and the initial effects
of the coronavirus crisis on saving and spending in Great Britain. Resolution Foundation. June 2020
Burgess, S., Fernandez-Corugedo, E., Groth, C., Harrison, R., Monti, F., Theodoridis, K., &
Waldron, M. (2013). The Bank of England’s forecasting platform: COMPASS, MAPS, EASE and the
suite of models. Bank of England Working Paper No. 471.
Cochrane, J. (2020). Reopening the economy, and aftermath. Webinar: COVID-19 and re-opening
the economy, Stanford University, Monday, May 18.
Debortoli, D. and Galí, J. (2017). Monetary policy with heterogeneous agents: Insights from TANK
models. Manuscript, September.
Eichenbaum, M.S., Rebelo, S., and Trabandt, M. (2020). The Macroeconomics of Epidemics. NBER
Working Paper 26882, April 2020.
Goolsbee, A. and Syverson, C. (2020). Fear, lockdown, and diversion: comparing drivers of
pandemic economic decline. NBER Working Paper 27432.
Guerrieri, V., Lorenzoni, G., Straub, L. and Werning, I. (2020). Macroeconomic Implications of
Covid-19: can Negative Supply Shocks Cause Demand Shortages? NBER Working Paper 26918.
Hacioglu, S., Känzig, D. and Surico, P. (2020). Consumption in the time of Covid-19: evidence from
UK transaction data. Discussion Paper DP14733, CEPR Discussion Paper Series.
Haskel, J. (2019). An end-of-year retrospective on the UK outlook and monetary policy. Speech at
Resolution Foundation, London.

those group working and consuming are predominantly infected. Thus the non-infected withdraw from activity and so economic activity is
worsened. With a strong quarantine policy, by contrast, the non-infected do not have this fear and economic activity is improved. In their
simulations, such containment via quarantine saves 1.7trillion US dollars. As they note, Ferguson 2006 argue that much virus transmission
does not occur in economic activity and so, for the maximum effect there would have to be very strict confinement around economic and
social activity. Issues around quarantine policy and testing are of course not for the monetary authorities to decide, but these models
suggest the outcomes for the economy depend upon their effects.
25

Joyce, R. and Xu, X. (2020). Sector shutdowns during the coronavirus crisis: which workers are most
exposed? Institute of Fiscal Studies Briefing Note BN278.
Kaplan, G. and Violante, G.L. (2018). Microeconomic Heterogeneity and Macroeconomic Shocks.
Journal of Economic Perspectives – Volume 32, Number 3 – Summer 2018 – Pages 167-194.
Kaplan, G., Moll, B. and Violante, G.L. (2020). Pandemics According to HANK. Mimeo.
Kenway, P., Barwick, S. and Corry, D. (2020). ‘Excess saving’ in lockdown: a big new economic
challenge. New Policy Institute.
Ravn, M.O. and Sterk, V. (2020). Macroeconomic Fluctuations with HANK & SAM: an Analytical
Approach.
Resolution Foundation (March 2020). “Doing what it takes. Protecting firms and families from the
economic impact of coronavirus”. Briefing.
Resolution Foundation (June 2020). “A new settlement for the low paid. Beyond the minimum wage
to dignity and respect”. Briefing.
Tenreyro, S. (2018). Models in macroeconomics. Speech given at the University of Surry, Guilford.
Tenreyro, S. (2020). Covid-19 and the economy: what are the lessons so far? London School of
Economics webinar, 15 July 2020.

26

