Bank of England
Mark Carney, Governor
Inclusive Capitalism Conference Audience Q&A
27th May 2014

Page 2
Inclusive Capitalism Audience Q&A - 27.5.14

Zanny Minton Beddoes:

You said you wouldn't say anything interesting; I'm afraid on
that count you failed dramatically. That was a pretty bracing
analysis of the lack of inclusivity of financial capitalism. I'm
just going to - I was scribbling notes furiously - I'm just going
to quote a few things back to you. "Unchecked market
fundamentalism can devour the social capital that's necessary
for the dynamism of capitalism." You said that market
fundamentalism contributed to the crisis and that ensuing
events have further eroded trust in the system.
It was - if one just heard that, to hear that from the Governor
of the Bank of England, in this location, in front of this
audience, seems to me a fairly bracing analysis of the
problems we're facing.
You then went on to offer some solutions and I want to push
you on those a little bit more, because you gave a very big
list of things to do. Which of your voluminous to-do list is the
most important? And how much difference will it make? Will
it make us feel better, or will it actually make capitalism more
inclusive?

Mark Carney, Governor of the
Bank of England:

Well let me say two things, Zanny. The first is - I like this,
it's a sort of Godlike voice, this is the voice I should have as
Governor, booming down from the ceiling. What I said about
the analysis - that is the analysis that has motivated these
financial reforms. There's a recognition that there was overreliance in markets clearing all the time, there was overreliance in completing markets as a response to any problem
that developed. And the collapse of those assumptions has
led us to a series of changes.
Now which of those changes are the most important? I would
start with "too big to fail", for several reasons, but the most
important of which is that the presence of these institutions -

Page 3
Inclusive Capitalism Audience Q&A - 27.5.14
for two reasons. First is from a social capital perspective
there's a fundamental sense of unfairness that was revealed,
and for that reason alone it's necessary to make the
adjustments.
But secondly, the existence of institutions at the core of the
system that amplified any shock because of the possibility of
their failing in a disorderly way, caused - leaves us with a
fundamentally unstable system.
The consequence of that has been a series of measures in
order to truly end "too big to fail". That's why six years after
Lehman Brothers we're still talking about it. It's not that it's
low on the priority list, it's that it's at the top of the priority
list and authorities are truly working to ensure, as much as
possible ex-ante, that that has happened.
Zanny Minton Beddoes:

Christine Lagarde this morning said - and you quoted one
part of what she said. She also said that fatigue had set in.
Do you think that you're really on course to ending "too big to
fail"? And then I'm going to open the floor to questions. But
if this is the most important, are you really succeeding at it?

Mark Carney, Governor of the
Bank of England:

Well there are two crucial initiatives this year in order to
substantially end "too big to fail". There'll be clean-up issues
afterwards. But the first is to introduce so-called goneconcern loss-absorbing capacity, which is another layer of
bail-inable capital - it's another layer of capital into the
institution that is required to stabilise the institution before
the taxpayers have to.
We're working flat out on this; there are nine jurisdictions
that are host to the 29 "too big to fail banks", and the intent
is to have the principles in place - the structure in place - by
Brisbane. And we're on schedule, but I wouldn’t downplay
the difficulty of the technical issues there.

Page 4
Inclusive Capitalism Audience Q&A - 27.5.14

The second one we could actually solve almost in this room
given the - I forget the trillion capital …
Zanny Minton Beddoes:

30, 30 trillion.

Mark Carney, Governor of the
Bank of England:

… 30 trillion of capital that's represented, which is to ensure
that when a cross-border bank fails, that no particular group
of creditors is unduly advantaged, particularly in derivative
markets. And it's to introduce something called, basically
stays on those derivative contracts.
We think we will have an agreement with the sell side with all
the major derivative banks in the course of the next few
months. That is very much because of the hard work and the
leadership of the sell side. And we want to ensure that the
buy side, the 30 trillion plus, is also supportive of that.
Because if the buy side takes seriously their sense of the
systemic, their commitment to the system, they also need to
participate in something like this so that they're not taking
advantage of everyone else who is working for the most
inclusive solution.

Zanny Minton Beddoes:

So we will have made serious progress in solving "too big to
fail". Now I have a tonne of questions, but I'm quite sure
that there are plenty of others. So if you let me put my
glasses on so I can see you, yes why don't we start here?

Question:

Thank you, Mark, that was fantastic. The Governor just prior
to you had a wonderful speech just before the collapse of a
large UK institution, and it was about the balance between
market discipline, self-discipline and then regulatory
discipline. Where is that balance now in what you've talked
about?

Mark Carney, Governor of the

Page 5
Inclusive Capitalism Audience Q&A - 27.5.14
Bank of England:

Well, no, I mean I think Mervyn's framework is right in that
we're moving - even though we're putting in place a series of
regulatory changes, what we're moving as much as possible
is to more market discipline. It may not sound like it, it
sounds like a lot of acronyms, a lot of people getting together
in Basel and dreaming up new things.
But in effect what we're trying to do is to push back market
discipline. So the advantage of the too big fail initiatives,
whether it's bail-inable capital or other aspects, is that the
private market holders of that debt will anticipate the risk
that they are now running, the risk that they're not putting
back onto the state, and encourage changes to how those
businesses are run, how much capital they hold, how much
liquidity they hold.
So the second element there is self-discipline - Mervyn's
terminology - which is what - the responsibilities of senior
management - making them absolutely clear that if you are a
senior manager of a bank you are responsible for what that
bank does. It's quite incredible that that's not absolutely
clear either in corporate governance or regulatory terms. But
in the aftermath of the 2008 crisis, at least in the UK, there's
enough ambiguity about that that we're making it absolutely
clear who's responsible for the management.
So I would put, even though there's a lot of regulation or
regulatory initiatives, in the end we're trying to put the
discipline back to the market and the individuals who interact
with the market.

David Marsh:

You're in a way on several sides of the trade as a central
banker, Mr Governor, because you've talked about the buy
side, but of course the central banks are very large owners of
assets, 12 trillion dollars as a genre, then you add the
sovereign funds and you add the public pension funds, soon
you're talking about real money.

Page 6
Inclusive Capitalism Audience Q&A - 27.5.14

Laughter
You were mentioning earlier the social ostracism, which I
suppose means that you no longer get a Christmas card from
the Governor of the Bank of England.
Mark Carney, Governor of the
Bank of England:

Professional ostracism, David.

David Marsh:

But you could actually use that buying power, that mass of
assets, in a very good way as a kind of punishment to those
don't really live up to the standards. And of course you could
use that power of asset management in a very socially useful
way. And I just wondered whether - not perhaps the Bank of
England, but central banks as a whole - shouldn't use that
mass, also if you throw in the other public groups that one
has at one's disposal you would actually be an extraordinary
force for good in all kinds of ways. And I wondered whether
that has crossed your mind?

Mark Carney, Governor of the
Bank of England:

It has not been a conversation that we've had, first point. I
would say that by and large the central banks, so the central
bank asset managers, have implemented changes to market
practices; they've been at the front end of implementing
those changes to market practices. So, for example, two way
margining on derivative contracts, even though many of them
are Triple A, those have been implemented. Bank of Canada
when I was there we did it at the front. So things such as
these issues around derivative stays, one would expect that
the central banks would.
I hesitate to suggest changes to the investment philosophies
of broader public pools of capital. But I think you would find
in talking to the managers of those pools that they tend to
take a longer-term view, they tend to take a view about the

Page 7
Inclusive Capitalism Audience Q&A - 27.5.14
system; they tend to think about how the system works, and
they independently tend to manage their affairs consistently
with that. And one sees that in terms of market share of
various private institutions with those pools of capital.
Mark Carney, Governor of the
Bank of England:

I'm conscious that I'm keeping the Governor and you from
your main course, so I'm going to have one or two quick
questions, there was a gentleman there, yes.

Alan Yarrow, Chairman, CISI:

Mr Governor, thank you very much for your introduction. My
name is Alan Yarrow and I am Chairman of the CISI. We are
an accrediting body for people who are in management.
We've recently had the Lambert Review looking at what's
happening in banks. He's come through with a very good
suggestion that he's going to rely more on the professional
bodies to make sure that their staff are properly qualified.

Mark Carney, Governor of the
Bank of England:

Yes.

Alan Yarrow, Chairman, CISI:

He didn't go so far as to argue that they should remain as
members of those professional bodies. Looking at regulation
generally, regulation is introduced every day in our business,
and keeping up with it is quite difficult. We already have an
infrastructure for professional bodies. Do you endorse the
idea that those people involved in finance should be members
of professional bodies?

Mark Carney, Governor of the
Bank of England:

Yeah - well it depends on what you mean by endorse. Should
they be members of professional bodies? Yes. Should those
professional bodies be effective? Absolutely. Are they all
effective? No. And if they're not effective should they be
supplemented? Yes. So how's that for … ?

Page 8
Inclusive Capitalism Audience Q&A - 27.5.14
Zanny Minton Beddoes:

That's a pretty clear answer. One last question here, the
gentleman here.

Jesse Norman:

Thank you, Governor, for an absolutely fascinating speech.
One word you haven't mentioned which I think everyone
would agree is fundamental to inclusive capitalism is
ownership. And I wonder whether you think that, given in
many cases the reasons why these institutions failed in the
financial sector can be traceable to poor ownership and poor
selection of directors perhaps, whether you think there are
things we can do to improve the quality of ownership of
financial institutions or indeed the quality of ownership of
companies more widely?

Mark Carney, Governor of the
Bank of England:

It's good it's just like being back at the TSE, Jesse. For those
of you who don't know Jesse Norman, one of the leading
members of the Treasury Select Committee, who has led both
the TSE and also the Parliamentary Commission on Banking have led many of the reforms here in the UK.
And one example, just to twin that point and your question,
goes to the senior person's regime, which is an initiative that
came from parliament; I referenced it in the speech, and has
been implemented now by the PRA, the regulatory arm of the
Bank of England. And the reason it goes right to the heart of
this is that directors didn't fully recognise their obligations,
including down to Chairmen in some of these failed
institutions. And we're now in the process of making it
absolutely clear their responsibility for all the activities of the
institution, all the material activities of the institution, and
that it will have consequences.
And we're making it clear ex-ante, which will have an impact
I think in both the conduct of the institution, it will have an
impact in terms of their interaction with their owners, with

Page 9
Inclusive Capitalism Audience Q&A - 27.5.14
their shareholders and ultimately reduce this sense of
systemic risk.
Zanny Minton Beddoes:

I know there are lots more questions, but I think the
Governor needs to have his dinner, and so do you. But
Governor, thank you so much. That was extremely bracing
and I think in some ways a call to arms.

Applause
END

