Independence and responsibility: observations from an
External Member of the Monetary Policy Committee
Speech given by
Martin Weale, External Member of the Monetary Policy Committee

At the Thomas Guggenheim Conference
28 June 2015

I would like to thank Nicholas Fawcett and Tomas Key for their help preparing this text. I am also
grateful to Alina Barnett, Jamie Bell, Colette Bowe, Kristin Forbes, Gareth Ramsay, Ian McCafferty,
David Miles, Sophie Stone, Marilyne Tolle, Kenny Turnbull, and Seb Walsh for their advice and
suggestions.

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Introduction

Thank you very much for inviting me here today to talk about my experience as a member of the
Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee. I have now been an external member of the Committee for
nearly five years, and my second and final three-year term finishes at the end of July 2016. So, while these
are in no sense valedictory remarks I have had the privilege of observing the workings of the Committee for
quite a long period.

External members of the Monetary Policy Committee are appointed by the Chancellor of the Exchequer from
outside the Bank. They are there to provide an independent voice, and the expectation of independence is
set out explicitly from the very beginning: the current advertisement states “candidates must be
1

independently minded... [and] must form their own views and decisions”. So the focus of this talk is on
independence, and what it has meant in practice.

The independence of the Monetary Policy Committee has two dimensions. The first is that the entire
Committee, and process of setting monetary policy, is independent from the government. This is a
corner-stone of credible policy making, which ensures that the public have faith that it is free of political
interference. Secondly, individual members must themselves be independent, and articulate their own
interpretations and assessment of the current economic situation and its implications. They should not limit
themselves to expressing a single MPC view.

Taking the Committee as a whole, its collective independence was enshrined in the monetary policy
framework set up in 1997 by the newly elected Labour government. In a break from the previous regime,
monetary policy is set by a body of nine members, five of whom are drawn from the Bank’s executive –
so-called internal members – and four are external members.
The Committee has complete discretion over decisions on monetary policy. But its primary objective – an
inflation target of two per cent – is set by the Chancellor of the Exchequer. The Committee’s members are
answerable to the Treasury Committee of the House of Commons – and through that, to Parliament – but the
decisions on policy themselves are free of political control. The framework therefore combines the benefits of
independent decisions, with overall accountability to the public.

The Treasury Committee holds hearings into appointments and re-appointments to the Committee, but it
does not have the power to veto them. In contrast to what may be practice elsewhere, it does not enquire
into political leanings but expresses a view on whether appointees meet criteria for professional competence
and personal independence.

1

See Cabinet Office (2015).

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2

In the report of the hearing after my own appointment the Treasury Committee (2010) stated
“Given that votes on the Monetary Policy Committee are conducted under a one-person,
one-vote system, for the Committee as a whole to be considered independent, its members
must be seen to be independent too.

Independence is especially important given the

high-profile nature of the role, where members of the Monetary Policy Committee are expected,
via speeches and interviews with the press, to ensure that the process of monetary policy is
accountable to the wider public.”

So I would like to spend much of my time reflecting on independence and its implications as I have seen
them. I would also like to say something about transparency. Following a report by Warsh (2014) the
Committee is making substantial changes to its practices, with the aim of enhancing transparency. I will offer
my observations on these, based on what I have seen so far.

I should remind you that, just as there is no such thing as objective history, so here I am not offering any
objective account of the workings of the Committee. I am doing no more than providing my own
interpretation and explanation of the way I have seen my role in the light of the expectations created by the
quotations above.

Voting and deliberation: the individual and the collective

It is generally accepted that monetary policy decisions reached by committees through voting are, on
average, better than decisions reached by individuals (Siebert, 2006, Lombardelli, Proudman and Talbot,
2

2005). Nevertheless, different committees work in very different ways. For example, it is rare for those
members of the Federal Reserve Board who are not chairmen of regional reserve banks – whom I might see
as the equivalent of their external members – to vote against the Board Chairman. In contrast, members of
the Monetary Policy Committee frequently vote in a minority.

3

There is of course a substantial body of literature on the characteristics of effective monetary policy
committees (summarised by Maier, 2010) and the external membership of the Committee is generally
regarded as delivering an important component of independent thought. What I have read misses, however,
the importance of the way in which the role is defined, ultimately by Parliament for the conduct of committee
members. The extracts in the introduction make clear what is expected in the United Kingdom and the
appointments process, handled by the Civil Service since 2008, has been designed to ensure that external

2

Warsh (2014, p. 26) summarises the structures of decision-making at ten central banks. In six of these policy is the outcome of a
vote, although, as a comparison between the Federal Reserve Board and the Bank of England shows, voting means different things in
different places.
3
There have been minority votes at about half of the meetings.

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

3

members can be appointed from as wide a field as possible in order to deliver a balanced committee. For
example, not all of the members have been British subjects.

4

In the early days of the Committee there was some press concern that the absence of unanimity would
indicate some sort of failure of the policy-making process. The first minority vote came, however, without
disaster. And the sky remained resolutely in place when the previous Governor, Mervyn King, was himself
out-voted. There are, nevertheless, long periods of unanimity which have, indeed, led some City economists
to ask what the point of the Committee is, if there is no dissent. Even the Treasury Committee has been
known to ask the Governor why dissent has been limited.

Of course the answer is that there is no such thing as too little or too much dissent. The right way for each
member to vote is the way that they think appropriate at the time and that in one sense is the end of the
matter. While I have voted in a minority at a number of the meetings I have been to, I have not doubted that
my colleagues’ votes were as correct as my own. The future is, by its nature, uncertain and it does not
surprise me in the least that nine people whose job it is to come to their own conclusions about economic
prospects do not always come to the same conclusions.

The fact that we vote individually does not, of course, mean that members lose sight of the need to make the
Committee work sensibly as a committee both internally and publicly. The full sentence from the job
advertisement I quoted earlier reads “Candidates must be able to form their own views and decisions whilst
working closely and constructively with other members of the Committee”. This means more than just
listening to each other’s views; it means trying to understand what lies behind different interpretations of the
facts. Warsh (2014, p. 22) describes working closely and constructively as deliberation; it is something that a
committee can offer in a way that atomised individuals cannot. I agree completely with the point he makes
“Genuine deliberation is therefore the process by which participants not only share information but
also learn from and influence each other. It is the crux of good decision-making processes within both
the public and private spheres.”

and would add two points. First, I have found this process of deliberation, learning from my colleagues, one
of the most fascinating and enjoyable parts of my job. Secondly, while it is helpful to refer to the first phase
of the Committee’s meeting as a deliberation meeting deliberation involves much more than a Committee
5

discussion for three hours in each meeting cycle. It summarises the whole process whereby we study,
discuss, and interpret briefing material kindly provided by the Bank staff and how, each quarter, we produce
a forecast which represents the best collective judgement of the Committee. A particularly valuable
4
Kristin Forbes and Adam Posen are American, while the current Governor, Mark Carney, is Canadian. There has not, as yet, been a
member who has spent most of their career in continental Europe.
5
The original format of MPC meetings comprised two parts: first, what, following Warsh, I refer to as a del beration meeting. Second, a
discussion and voting meeting at which members of the Committee explained the rationale behind their votes, and voted. These
meetings took place on a Wednesday afternoon and a Thursday morning. A pre-MPC meeting at which staff presented their views and
analysis took place on the Friday before. I discuss the current format later.

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

4

component of deliberation is that members read and comment on each other’s speeches before they
become public. I hardly need add that that process has invariably helped me express my own arguments.

Barabas (2004) argues that deliberation is a route to a deliberative consensus and suggests that if a
consensus is not reached deliberators will just talk past each other. My own experience is that, at least in
the context of the Monetary Policy Committee, deliberation is extremely valuable even when a clear range of
opinion remains.

Perhaps I can illustrate that there is more to working together than just deliberation, with reference to the
situation I found myself in in autumn 2013. I had voted against the specific proposals for interest rate
forward guidance (Monetary Policy Committee, 2013) on the grounds that, given the recent history of
inflation at that time, they ran a substantial risk of weakening the credibility of the Committee’s commitment
to delivering the inflation target. Having, however, been out-voted by eight votes to one, it seemed to make
no sense for me to continue as though the policy did not exist. Both at the time and with the benefit of
hindsight, the right thing was for me to set my subsequent contributions in the context of the guidance
framework that everyone else was using. This did, however, lead to some journalists observing, at least
privately, that I had voted against the policy because of some technical flaw rather than because I had a
material and fundamental difficulty with it.
6

Could I conclude this section on voting with a stray thought? I have mentioned the inevitable uncertainty
which surrounds decision-making. I have often thought that if each member could cast a hundred votes
instead of just one, I could represent, at least to some degree, the uncertainty I see about the appropriate
policy. If the Committee were to vote in this way, with each member representing the situation as they
actually see it, the outcome would, on occasion, be different from that emerging from conventional majority
voting.

To give an example, in December 2014 I voted for an increase in Bank Rate. With a hundred votes, I might
have cast fifty-two for an increase in Bank Rate, forty-six to keep Bank Rate unchanged and two for a
reduction in Bank Rate to ¼ per cent. This small vote for a reduction would have reflected the probability I
gave to the economy lapsing into a deflationary spiral. By January 2014, the price of oil had fallen further,
and I felt both that the case for an increase was less pressing and that the risk of a deflationary spiral had
increased somewhat. So I might have cast forty-seven votes for an increase, forty-eight for no change and
five for a reduction. This was reflected by the use of the term “finely balanced” in the minutes of the January
meeting.

Would this work as a general approach to voting? If some members cast most or all their votes behind one
decision, perhaps out of a belief that being decisive was more important than trying to come to a sensible

6

Derived from observations by Charlie Bean.

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

5

collective decision, then other members would find it difficult to follow the spirit of this approach. If, however,
everyone voted to represent what they actually thought, my hunch is that it would yield, on occasion, different
and better decisions.

7

Who does what? The scope and function of monetary policy

Let me now turn to an aspect of independence which, I think it is fair to say, could not have been anticipated.
In 1997, there was a straightforward distinction between the monetary policy decisions made by the MPC,
and their subsequent implementation by Bank of England staff. There was only one policy instrument in
active use, Bank Rate, and the operational side of policy – collectively called the Sterling Market Framework
– was the responsibility of the Bank’s executive.

The financial crisis of 2008-09 shook things up, as further monetary stimulus was warranted even once
Bank Rate reached ½ per cent, an effective floor at the time. The response of the MPC – before I joined –
was to provide ‘unconventional’ monetary stimulus, mainly in the form of asset purchases. This preserved
the same distinction between decisions and implementation as before: the MPC voted on the total size of
asset purchases, and the Bank oversaw the purchases of government stock that the Committee had voted
for.

Where I felt there was tension, though, was in the provision of further monetary stimulus in 2012. In an
attempt to encourage banks to increase their net lending to the economy, the Bank and HM Treasury set up
the Funding for Lending Scheme (FLS) in 2012. This guaranteed funding on particularly favourable terms for
banks that did increase their net lending.

It was, in my view, a means of easing the monetary stance, and therefore regular use of such a tool was a
decision about which the Monetary Policy Committee had a role (Weale, 2012); at least it seemed to me that
Parliament would have asked for this had it anticipated the circumstances. This highlights the uncertainty
around a suitable demarcation of monetary policy since the crisis. Should the FLS, or similar schemes, be
thought of as monetary policy-making, or simply part of the central bank’s function in looking after the
banking system?

We have been fortunate that another independent review, led by Bill Winters, has since set out the problem
clearly. Winters (2012) commented that “it would seem appropriate that the MPC should not only be
informed, but should also have an opportunity to give a view” on any liquidity operations undertaken by the
8

Bank. This has been implemented in a subsequent Concordat between the Bank and the MPC

7

The approach would mean that the Committee based its decision on a collective view of the uncertainty, rather than as a result of
individual members coming to a decision based on their own assessments of uncertainty.
8
Winters (2012), paragraph 417.

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

6

(Bank of England, 2013), in which any prospective changes to the Sterling Monetary Framework must be
discussed with the whole MPC. The Concordat states:
“In the event that some key parameters of the Sterling Monetary Framework are varied with the
primary intent of affecting monetary conditions, then their control will pass to the MPC.”

Steps like these, which ensure that the Committee is included in discussions and decisions about the
monetary stance, help enshrine the overall independence of the monetary policy arrangements.

Independence and communication

The role of communication as a means of making monetary policy effective has been widely discussed (see
e.g. Woodford, 2005). External members are expected to “make a strong contribution to the MPC’s
communications, explaining policy decisions to the public”. I, and I think all members, have interpreted this
as meaning that we have to explain our own positions and our own individual votes by means of newspaper
articles, interviews and speeches, statements for which texts are publicly available. The need is particularly
acute when policy changes. It is at least as strong when a member starts voting in a minority or, equally
reverts to voting with the majority.

Members, and particularly those in a minority, have a special obligation to explain their positions, not as
certainties, which they never can be, but as their own balanced judgements put in the context of the
Committee’s best collective judgement. The duty of members to express their own views clearly in public
while at the same time maintaining the collegiate nature of the Committee creates a challenge which I have
not faced on other decision-making bodies I have contributed to. My sense is that the Treasury Committee
would be concerned if we did not seek to explain changes in our votes, and thus in our underlying analysis in
this way.

Obviously a framework in which individual members are required to express their own views means that
there cannot always be a single message emerging from the Committee. Blinder (2007) drew attention to
the risk that this would mean that there was no clear message; one of the purposes of communication would
be frustrated by a multiplicity of views. Dale, Orphanides and Österholm (2008) highlighted the costs of
uncertain information; conflicting views cannot contribute to overall clarity. Siklos (2003), on the other hand,
found that volatility in interest rates was lower when the minutes of the Committee indicated disagreement
than when they showed unanimity. That said, this seems to me only a weak indicator of whether a
multiplicity of voices sows confusion.

In any case, there is a separate point which Blinder (2007) does not discuss. Communication of the range of
views on the Committee serves a separate purpose of explaining to the public some of the uncertainties

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

7

which affect the economy, and reassuring them that the Committee is doing its job thoroughly. In turn this
can sustain public confidence that inflation will be kept close to its target.

That process is, of course, helped if members whose views diverge from the collective judgement of the
Committee take care to explain, not just what their views are, but how and why they differ from that
judgement. Let me give one example of this. In early 2011 I was voting with two colleagues for an interest
rate rise because I was concerned that inflation was likely to remain above the target for more than the next
two years; I feared that persistent high inflation would raise inflation expectations appreciably. While this
never became the majority view, it is possible that the credibility of the inflation target in the public mind was
enhanced by public awareness of the debate on the Committee. If true, this would have helped bring
inflation back towards its target.

Independence, transparency and accountability

If communication is important as a tool of effective policy-making, transparency is even more important.
Without transparency the Committee’s processes and therefore the Committee itself would not maintain, or
indeed deserve, the confidence of Parliament.

The Committee also has to maintain the confidence of the public; if there were strong and sustained public
dissatisfaction with its decisions, then it seems likely that this would result in Parliament taking back control
of monetary policy. Public confidence requires a degree of public scrutiny of the way in which we go about
our business.

The quid pro quo of independence is accountability and thus transparency. The public is entitled to be
assured that the Committee is going about its work properly. The individual members have to be
accountable for the decisions that they take. I have already explained that public explanation of the factors
behind our votes is an important part of this accountability. It also means, however, that the processes of the
Committee must be open to scrutiny and review.

In its early days the Committee was one of the most transparent bodies making monetary policy. It was one
of the first to publish minutes, which it did initially after about five weeks and, from October 1998, onwards,
less than two weeks after the decision. The quarterly Inflation Report contained the Committee’s forecast,
represented as a best collective judgement of the different views of the members. The only variables for
which it contained explicit projections were, however, inflation and GDP growth. This led to frequent criticism
from readers that they could not judge what the MPC expected of other macro-economic variables and
therefore how it expected the economy to evolve.
The Stockton Report (Stockton, 2012), a review of the Monetary Policy Committee’s forecasting capability,
suggested that transparency could be enhanced if more information were provided on what lay behind the

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

8

Committee’s forecasts. We therefore have started to publish, in the Inflation Report a table of key
judgements, which describe the shape of the forecast in a bit more detail. The Bank also publishes, on its
web site, indicative projections of the components of demand together with projections for household
income, employment, and average weekly earnings. These are consistent with the MPC’s modal forecast
but are not themselves agreed by the Committee. They nevertheless provide a useful reference point not
only for outsiders but also for MPC members who wish to discuss, say, prospects for household spending.

At the same time the Committee has started to provide more information about how it sees the recent past
and very near future. Thus we show our nowcasts and nearcasts of unemployment, GDP growth and
inflation, together with indicators of their accuracy. My sense is that these changes have been a success,
and users of our forecasts have welcomed the extra information.

There have recently been further changes to the working of the Committee. When I joined the Committee I
was told that meetings were recorded but that the recording was destroyed once the minutes had been
prepared. The point of the recording was to assist in producing accurate minutes and there had been a
small number of occasions when the secretariat had listened to the recording to this end. The Treasury
Committee expressed the view in early 2014 that a transcript of the meetings should be made public after
some suitable interval.

The Governor then commissioned Kevin Warsh, a former Governor (i.e. member) of the Federal Reserve
Board, to review the matter. He took the view that to release a transcript of the deliberation meeting, at
which we test out each other’s arguments, would be likely to inhibit debate. On the other hand there were
good reasons to release transcripts of the discussion meetings at which we explain our views and why we
vote the way we do. The Treasury Committee accepted this and, since March of this year transcripts of the
discussion meeting have been kept to be released after a delay of eight years.

One consequence of releasing transcripts of the discussion meeting is that I now stick to a prepared text,
which summarises the key points influencing my decision. My own contributions have become more stilted
as a result. But I hope I am adjusting to the new procedure. More importantly, I find it hard to believe that
this makes our monetary policy decisions worse. The broader benefits of releasing the transcripts in terms of
sustaining public confidence in the process far outweigh any theoretical cost. Given that the transcript is a
summary of what is likely to become public fairly soon, I myself favoured release much earlier than eight
years. However, it is also the case that much prompter release might influence the way in which members
present their views.
Warsh’s review was, however, more wide ranging. In fact it, together with Stockton’s earlier report,
amounted in large part to a board efficiency review. Warsh also suggested that the Committee met too
frequently and that we release a fuller statement immediately after our meeting.

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

9

The Bank’s response was to propose moving to eight MPC meetings a year, from the current twelve, a
change in which I can see considerable merit. The Government announced last month that it will be
proposing legislation to put this into place. Given the relatively slow pace with which the macroeconomy
usually evolves, this change will give both staff and Committee members more time to work on underlying
issues.

In addition, the MPC agreed to publish the minutes of its meetings alongside the announcement of the
decisions themselves. There are a number of gains from this new procedure. One is that there is only one
news event rather than a ‘drip feed’ of releases, between the announcement of the decision, the subsequent
publication of minutes, and on four occasions a year, the additional publication of the Inflation Report. Some
commentators have expressed concern about a deluge of information, but I doubt that the public wants to
hear from the Bank every day, and there is nothing wrong with journalists taking their time to absorb and
interpret the documents that we produce. Overall, I think the change will give our communications more
impact.

It does, of course, necessitate some changes to the timing of MPC meetings, to accommodate the process
of writing and agreeing the minutes. The process starts, as it always has done, with a briefing from Bank
staff on a range of indicators about the state of the economy in the United Kingdom and the rest of the world.
This now usually takes place on a Wednesday. The next day the Committee has its deliberation meeting,
which is not recorded. On the following Monday, the first of the transcribed meetings takes place, in which
each member explains how they expect to vote, and why. The actual vote, however, does not take place
until Wednesday, with the results and minutes of the meeting to be published the day after that.

9

This does carry the risk that “events” or at least material new data may emerge in between meetings,
although I do not expect that to happen very often. If that does occur, then the drafting skills of the
Committee will be put to the test because the minutes will have to be prepared more quickly. In any case,
what cost this does bring should be set against the benefits of transparency and immediacy. And once we
move to eight meetings the risk of them coinciding with the release of key data will be lower.

Conclusions

Although I have covered only some of the issues related to the work of the MPC, I hope I have offered some
personal insights into its workings, and have given some indication of what it is trying to achieve.

I mentioned early on in this text that none of the literature I have read on the importance of the Committee
structure and the role of external members draws attention to the way in which their function is defined and

9

In June and July 2015 the publication of the minutes has followed its previous schedule. That will change in August.

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

10

the implications of this for the effectiveness of policy. For me this, as summarised by the advertisement for
the post, sets the standard for the way in which I have attempted to fulfil the role.

It will be some time before the arrangements that I have described here match the Gold Standard in terms of
durability. That, after all, lasted from 1717 to 1931.

10

The runner-up, the fixed exchange rate system, lasted

from 1944 to 1972, so that post-War record will soon be in the Committee’s sights. I believe that the policy of
targeting inflation with the Monetary Policy Committee having operational independence has, however,
proved its worth in the very difficult circumstances of the last years. As I hope I have demonstrated, while
monetary policy-making has been subject to necessary innovation, the fundamental principles of
independence and individual responsibility have been maintained, and I am confident that these will continue
to serve the country well.

10

Although it was suspended from 1797 to 1821, and gold exports were banned from 1919 to 1925.

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

11

References
Bank of England (2013). The MPC and the Bank’s Sterling Monetary Framework.
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/about/Documents/legislation/mpcconcordat.pdf
Barabas, J. (2004). “How Deliberation affects Policy Opinions”. American Political Science Review. Vol 98.
Pp 687-701.
Blinder, A.S. (2007). “Monetary Policy by Committee: why and how?”. European Journal of Political
Economy. Vol 23. Pp 106-123.
Cabinet Office (2015). http://publicappointments.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/MPCcandidate-pack-FINAL.pdf
Dale, S., A. Orphanides and P. Österholm. (2008). “Imperfect Central Bank Communication: Information
versus Distraction”. IMF Working Paper WP/08/60
Lombardelli, C, J. Proudman and J. Talbot. (2005). “Committees versus Individuals: an Experimental
Analysis of Monetary Policy Decision-Making”. International Journal of Central Banking. Vol 1. Pp 181-205.
Maier, P. (2010). “How Central Banks take Decisions: an Analysis of Monetary Policy Meetings”. In
Challenges in Central Banking. Ed. P.L. Siklos, M.T. Bohl and M.E. Wohar. Cambridge University Press.
Cambridge. Pp. 320-356.
Monetary Policy Committee. (2013). “Monetary Policy Trade-offs and Forward Guidance”
Siebert, A. (2006). “Central Banking by Committee”. International Finance Vol 9. Pp 145-168.
Siklos, P.L. (2002). The Changing Face of Central Banking: Evolutionary Trends since World War II.
Cambridge University Press. Cambridge.
Stockton, D. (2012). Review of the Monetary Policy Committee’s Forecasting Capability.
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/news/2012/cr3stockton.pdf
Treasury Committee. (2010). “Appointment of Dr Martin Weale to the Monetary Policy Committee of the
Bank of England.” http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201011/cmselect/cmtreasy/475/47504.htm
Warsh, K. (2014). Transparency and the Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee.
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/news/2014/warsh.pdf
th

Weale, M. (2012). Monetary Policy: navigating Rough Waters. Hart-Brown 8 Annual Economic Forum.
Guildford. http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2012/590.aspx
Winters, W. (2012). “Review of the Bank of England’s Framework for Providing Liquidity to the Banking
System”. http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/news/2012/cr2winters.pdf
Woodford, M. (2005). “Central Bank Communication and Policy Effectiveness”. NBER Working Paper
11898. www.nber.org/papers/w11898

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

12

