Inflation targeting in practice: the UK experience
Speech given by
John Vickers, Executive Director and Chief Economist at the Bank of England

At the conference on Implementation of Price Stability, Frankfurt
November 1998

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Inflation targeting in practice: the UK experience

In this speech,(1) John Vickers, Executive Director and Chief Economist at the Bank of England, discusses
theoretical and practical issues relating to inflation targeting as used in the United Kingdom during the
past six years. After outlining the role of the Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee, he considers the
Committee’s task from a theoretical perspective, before discussing the concept and measurement of
domestically generated inflation.
Introduction
Six years ago this week, sterling left the exchange rate
mechanism (ERM) of the European Monetary System, and
dropped by 7% from DM 2.80 to DM 2.60. But since
falling below DM 2.20 in l995, sterling has risen to levels
higher than before its exit from the ERM. In an economy as
open to international trade as the United Kingdom, one
might have expected that such large swings in the price of
foreign exchange would destabilise domestic price inflation.
Not so. For every month since the start of 1993, inflation(2)
has remained in a range of 2%–31/2%. This is an
uncharacteristic degree of UK price stability by recent
historical standards (see Chart 1). Over the same period,
annual GDP growth has averaged about 3%, well above
trend, and the unemployment rate has fallen from 10% to
6.2%.(3)
Chart 1
RPIX inflation
Percentage change on a year earlier
30

25

20

15

10

5

0
1975

80

85

90

95

98

For these six years, the United Kingdom’s nominal anchor
has been an explicit inflation target, and on 1 June this year,
a new statutory framework for the implementation of price
stability (and much else) came into force in the shape of the
Bank of England Act 1998.(4) First, I shall briefly describe
this framework, and how the operationally independent
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) works within it—how
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

we make decisions, how we seek to explain them, and how
we are held accountable for doing the job we have been
given.
Next, though my task is to discuss inflation targeting from
the practical perspective of UK experience, I shall take a
detour and discuss a sort of converse question: how might
UK practice appear from the perspective of the theory of
inflation targeting? Then finally, and returning to the theme
of inflation targeting in an open economy, I shall discuss the
practical and topical problem of inflation control in the face
of large exchange rate movements, and how the concept of
domestically generated inflation may help in addressing it.(5)

The United Kingdom’s new monetary
framework
Almost immediately after coming into office, the new
Government announced on 6 May 1997 that the Bank of
England would henceforth have operational independence
for the conduct of monetary policy. While the objectives of
policy remain a matter for the Government to determine,
responsibility for interest rate decisions moved to the Bank’s
new MPC. The MPC operated for a year on a de facto
basis, and now has a statutory basis under the Bank of
England Act. The Act also reformed the governance and
finances of the Bank, and transferred responsibility for
banking supervision to the new Financial Services
Authority; the job of government debt management has
moved to the Treasury.
The MPC has nine members—the Governor, the two Deputy
Governors (David Clementi and Mervyn King), the Bank’s
Executive Directors for Monetary Operations
(Ian Plenderleith) and Monetary Analysis (me), and four
members appointed by the Chancellor of the Exchequer:
Sir Alan Budd (formerly Chief Economic Adviser at the
Treasury), Willem Buiter (Cambridge University),
Charles Goodhart (London School of Economics), and
DeAnne Julius (formerly Chief Economist at British
Airways). Our monthly policy meetings span two days, and
decisions are taken by a vote, with the Governor having a

Given at the Conference on Implementation of Price Stability held in Frankfurt on 11–12 September 1998.
As measured by the retail price index excluding mortgage interest payments (RPIX).
On the Labour Force Survey measure.
The Act is described in more detail in the May 1998 Quarterly Bulletin, pages 93–99.
I am very grateful to Bank of England colleagues Bill Allen, David Barker, Willem Buiter, Spencer Dale, Andrew Haldane, Graham Kentfield,
Mervyn King, Ben Martin, Paul Mizen, Jo Paisley and Chris Salmon for their helpful comments and suggestions on an earlier version. The views
expressed are entirely my own, and are not necessarily those of other MPC members, or of the Bank more generally.

368

Inflation targeting in practice: the UK experience

casting vote in the event of a tie. A representative from the
Treasury attends.

Chart 2
Inflation projection
Percentage increase in prices on a year earlier

The paramount statutory duty of the MPC is the
maintenance of price stability. This is defined in terms of
a target for the annual rate of retail price inflation excluding
mortgage interest payments (RPIX). The Chancellor’s letter
of 3 June 1998 defining the MPC’s remit says that ‘the
inflation target is 21/2% at all times’. The remit recognises
that exogenous shocks and disturbances may cause inflation
on occasions to deviate from the target, and that ‘attempts
to keep inflation at the inflation target in these
circumstances may cause undesirable volatility in output’.
If the target is missed by more than 1 percentage point on
either side, the Governor, as chairman of the MPC, must
write an open letter to the Chancellor explaining why the
target was missed and what action is being taken to rectify
the situation. Subject to the paramount statutory duty of
price stability, the MPC must support the Government’s
economic policy, including its objectives for growth and
employment.

6

5

4

3
2.5
2

1

0
1994
9595/4 96/2
9696/4 97/2
9797/4 98/2
9898/4 99/2
9999/4 00/2
2000
94/2
94/3
94/4 95/2
95/3
96/3
97/3
98/3
99/3
00/3

Chart 3
GDP projection
Percentage increase in output on a year earlier

5

There are two main vehicles of transparency: the minutes
of the monthly MPC meetings and the quarterly Inflation
Report, the twenty third of which was published last month.
The minutes give a frank but non-attributable account of
the Committee’s discussion, and individual votes are
recorded.
The Report, which is prepared by Bank staff under the
guidance of, and with the approval of, the MPC, offers a
detailed account of recent economic developments, and
gives projections for inflation and GDP growth up to a
two-year horizon.

6

4

3

2

1
+
_ 0
1
1994

95

96

97

98

99

2000

Source for Charts 2 and 3: August 1998 Inflation Report.

Charts 2 and 3 show the ‘fan chart’ projections from the
August Report, assuming constant interest rates. The fan
charts are explicit about the Committee’s (best estimate of
its) uncertainty about the future. The shading is rather as on
a contour map: at each point in time, the darkest region
contains the central projection or highest probability path
(ie the mode) and covers 10% of the probability, while
paths considered decreasingly likely are in the
correspondingly lighter regions that fan out. The
uncertainties around the central projection are not
necessarily symmetric—eg there is some upward skew in
the inflation fan chart—and so the mode, median and mean
may well differ. More on this later.
The minutes and the Reports are also important for
accountability to the public generally, and specifically to the
Bank’s Court of Directors, to the Government, and to the
Treasury Committee of the House of Commons. MPC
members regularly give evidence before the Treasury
Committee, and in June this year there were (non-statutory)
confirmation hearings. I am pleased to report that we all
passed.

UK inflation targeting from a theoretical
perspective
How might an academic surveying the United Kingdom’s
new monetary arrangements from the supposedly ivory
towers describe the MPC in theoretical terms? I imagine
that this academic would seek to define our objective in
terms of a loss function,(1) and our behaviour in terms of an
associated reaction function that relates policy decisions to
economic data.(2)
The loss function
It should go without saying that the MPC’s objectives are
given by the Act and by the remit set by the Chancellor.
There is a large literature on inflation bias,(3) but it is simply
not applicable to the MPC. We have no desire to spring
inflation surprises to try to bump output above its natural
rate (wherever that may be). Quite apart from the obligation
to fulfil our statutory duty, we have the strongest
professional and reputational incentives, which in my

(1) Summed over time and appropriately discounted.
(2) This hypothetical academic might also delve into the theory of voting, but let me not get into that.
(3) Stemming from Kydland and Prescott (1977), and Barro and Gordon (1983).

369

Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin: November 1998

opinion are incapable of being enhanced by financial
incentives, to get as close as we can to the inflation target.
The academic knows this, but has two questions. First, is
inflation the only thing that the MPC cares about—ie are we
‘inflation nutters’? Clearly not: the remit from the
Chancellor explicitly recognises that output volatility can be
undesirable. Thus, as discussed by King (1997), the
inflation target certainly does not ignore output. So how
fast should the MPC try to return inflation to target
following, say, an adverse supply shock? That depends on
the cost of output volatility (around the natural rate of
output) relative to the cost of inflation volatility (around the
inflation target). The MPC’s remit is silent on this
parameter of the loss function, but optimal policy is
arguably not too sensitive to its value within a reasonable
range.(1)
Concern about output volatility is also one way of
embracing the growth and employment objectives that are
statutorily subsidiary to the main objective of price stability,
which itself is of course a principal means of promoting
growth and employment: the real world works best when
inflation is under control.
The academic observer does not put any more ingredients
into the loss function imputed to us, eg by including interest
rate smoothing as an objective, though smooth-looking
interest rate paths might result from optimal policy, for
example because of the lag structure of the economy.(2)
Neither are monetary aggregates put into the loss function,
though we might watch them like hawks.
The academic’s second question is interestingly abstract:
what is the shape of the loss function? There is every
indication (eg from the 1% letter-writing thresholds) that, at
least as far as inflation is concerned, losses are symmetric:
being 0.6% above the target is neither better nor worse than
being 0.6% below it. But other things being equal, how
much worse is it to miss the target by 1.2% rather than by
0.6%? Possible answers include:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

infinitely worse (graphophobia),
four times as bad (quadratic loss function),
twice as bad (linear loss function), and
equally bad (perfectionism).(3)

As to case (a), I should first correct the popular
misunderstanding that graphophobia is the fear of graphs.
In fact, it is the fear of writing—specifically the fear of
having to write a letter to the Chancellor explaining why the
inflation target has been missed by more than 1%. But to
suppose that MPC members are graphophobes would surely
be to confuse their objective with a means of their
accountability.

The theoretical literature mostly, and not unreasonably,
assumes case (b). As is well known from the work of
Svensson (1997) and others, with inflation as the only
objective and with additive uncertainty, the optimal
intermediate target in case (b) is simply the forecast mean of
inflation at the policy horizon (eg two years ahead if policy
takes two years to be effective). Under the same
assumptions, case (c) makes the median of the inflation
projection the optimal intermediate target, while the
perfectionist in case (d) generally targets the mode in order
to maximise the probability of perfection.
Thus the assumed shape of the loss function influences
which measure of expected inflation is the intermediate
target. If probability distributions for inflation are
asymmetric, the differences between these measures can
matter in practical terms, and things are complicated further
when uncertainty is non-additive—see below. And it must
be remembered that the appropriate expectations about
future inflation are conditional upon the information
available. This brings us to the question of the reaction
function.
The reaction function
King (1997) looked forward to the day when monetary
policy would be boring: the news would be in the data, not
the authorities’ reaction to the data. Perhaps in the long run
we are all boring, but the MPC has not yet achieved that
nirvana. Indeed, the 25 basis point rate rise on 4 June 1998
apparently surprised the markets so much that it caused the
short-term interest rate futures contract to move by more
than 25 basis points.(4)
How boring can we aspire to be? Regretfully, I suspect that
there are fundamental limits. Consider the relatively simple
world of so-called ‘strict’ inflation targeting(5) and additive
uncertainty, where optimal policy targets the mean of future
inflation. This expectation is conditional upon everything
that the policy-maker knows and believes, including the
policy-maker’s own analysis, and not all that information is
in the public domain. While transparency—Inflation
Reports, MPC minutes, Treasury Committee hearings, and
so on—increases what is in the public domain (desirably in
my view), there is surely information relevant for
policy-making that is simply incapable of being put in the
public domain. In that case, and with the best will in the
world, optimal monetary policy cannot be absolutely
transparent, nor totally boring.
An analogy with contract theory might be useful. As
Williamson (1985) and others have shown, in situations of
any complexity, there is a tension between a complete
contract (ie one that specifies what is to happen in every
eventuality) and having a good contract (ie one that entails
good decisions in every eventuality). If the same is true for

(1) See Bean (1997), and Haldane and Batini (1997).
(2) See Sack (1998), and Goodhart (1998).
(3) A functional form for the loss function that encompasses all these cases (and many others) is L(x) = xα, where L is the loss, x is the deviation from
target, and α is zero in case (d), one in case (c), two in case (b), and approaching infinity in case (a). But the strictly graphophobic version of case
(a) has L(x) = 0 for x ≤ 1 and L(x) = k > 0 otherwise. With additive uncertainty, optimal behaviour for a strict graphophobe generally has equal
probabilities of inflation being exactly 11/2% and exactly 31/2%.
(4) Some were surprised at this degree of surprise, in view of the facts that the recent data had clearly worsened the prospects for inflation, and that the
most recently published minutes showed that three of the (then eight-person) Committee had favoured a rise in April.
(5) ‘Strict’ in the sense that inflation is the only argument in the loss function.

370

Inflation targeting in practice: the UK experience

policy reaction functions, then residual discretion is sensible
and so residual uncertainty is inevitable. (Moreover, MPC
decisions aggregate the views of nine people, each of whom
carries individual responsibility for his or her vote.)
For example, if model forecasts were used mechanically to
generate interest rate decisions, then the policy reaction
function could be put in the public domain by publishing
(i) the model equations, and (ii) the data series fed into the
model. The Bank is indeed planning to publish information
about the models and data used in making the projections
for inflation and growth, but for a number of good reasons
this will not—indeed cannot—amount to publishing a policy
reaction function.
First, as already stated, some information relevant for policy
simply cannot be put into the public domain. One
illustration of this point is the valuable information gathered
by the Bank’s twelve regional Agents, which cannot all be
published in detail, not least because the Bank would not
then be given much of the information to start with.
Second, models that are sufficiently manageable to
understand for policy purposes use only a small subset of
the information that is in the public domain. The rest
should not be ignored, but would be ignored by mechanistic
forecasting. An indication of the significance of this point is
that while the Bank’s core forecasting model has about 150
variables, the chart packs for the ‘pre-MPC’ briefing
meetings (on the Fridays before the monthly policy
meetings of the MPC) contain about 500 charts and tables
on a thousand or so variables.
Third, it follows not that we need a bigger model, but that
disciplined judgment is needed in applying the
(continuously evolving) models that we have. A key part of
that discipline comes from other models alongside the core
forecasting model, which inform the inputs to the core
model and/or the interpretation of outputs from it.
Fourth, the structure of the economy is not stationary: it is
always evolving (eg consider the NAIRU). Mechanistic use
of a forecasting model, whose equations necessarily reflect
past relationships, would risk ignoring aspects of structural
change. Again, there is a need for (disciplined) judgment—
for example, in adjusting equation residuals in the light of
the analysis of other models, in conjunction with the core
forecasting model. The models are simply tools to assist the
Committee in forming its view about the prospects for
inflation and growth.
Thus, good forecasting generally entails use of off-model
information (ie information outside the core model) and
hence off-model models. Precisely how this is done seems
to me to be literally indescribable in detail. While it may be
perfectly sensible for the outside observer to model the

MPC robotically, by ascribing to it a reaction function such
as a Taylor-like rule,(1) and while long-run model
simulations might otherwise make little sense, it therefore
seems impossible and anyway undesirable for the MPC to
attempt to specify or predict in formal terms its own future
behaviour in terms of a reaction function.(2)
Indeed, the projections in the fan charts shown earlier are
based on a simple assumption of constant interest rates up to
the two-year horizon. Of course, this is not a prediction that
rates will be constant for two years, even over the average of
possible eventualities. It is just a working assumption for
forecasting purposes.(3) Given that the MPC cannot sensibly
postulate its own future policy reaction function, I am not
sure what practicable alternatives there are, aside from the
other fan charts shown in the Inflation Report, based on the
time path of interest rates implied by the markets.
Mean versus mode
The hypothetical academic observer has one more question.
The Inflation Report fan charts might give some the
impression that the aspect of the probability distribution for
inflation most relevant for policy is the central projection, or
mode. It seems unlikely that the MPC have perfectionist
objectives (see above), so why are they not targeting the
mean, as most of the academic literature seems to
recommend as the optimal policy? Given the skewed
distributions for inflation published in recent Reports, this is
by no means only an academic question.
One response might be to say that the question confuses
presentation with substance. Fan charts are drawn, naturally
enough, like contour maps, so the mode has visual
prominence, but it does not follow that the mode determines
policy. The distribution as a whole, and other moments of
it, are taken fully into account. Though correct, this
response perhaps raises further questions. For example, in
the theoretical linear economy with additive shocks and
quadratic objectives, presentation might be better focused on
the mean rather than the mode, and the fan charts might
even be drawn in a different way.(4)
A second response notes that the central projection is
conditional on assumptions about exogenous variables,
which may have asymmetric probability distributions.
Suppose, to take a hypothetical example, that the most
likely path for sterling (which of course is not entirely
exogenous) is one of broad constancy, but that there is
thought to be a chance of a substantial fall. If policy could
respond to such a fall in time to keep expected inflation on
target, then targeting the mean of inflation conditional on
the assumed most likely case of broad constancy is
consistent with the unconditional mean being above the
target (on the working assumption, discussed above, of
unconditional policy).

(1) Such a rule of course requires specification of the output gap, which is arguably the greatest unknowable of all. And as will be discussed further
below, Svensson (1998) shows that optimal policy reaction functions under open-economy inflation targeting are not necessarily Taylor-like.
(2) Of course, the MPC says a great deal—in minutes, Inflation Reports, and so on—about which factors it sees as important for future policy, and why.
(3) It should be pointed out that the variance of the distributions depicted in the fan charts is based on empirical estimates for a period when policy was
of course reacting conditionally to unfolding events. If policy really was fixed unconditionally, the variance would be greater than shown.
(4) For example, as suggested by Wallis (1998).

371

Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin: November 1998

In this example, then, the mean of inflation could be on
target, whether or not there is a fall in sterling. But it would
be above target if sterling fell sharply and if policy ignored
the fall. If, rather than being based on unchanged rates, the
projection incorporated a policy reaction function, then
mean inflation would be on target in both the contingencies
in the example. But for the reasons given above, it is hard
to see how the MPC—as distinct from an outside
observer—can sensibly postulate a reaction function for
itself.
And third, it must be remembered that, even with ‘strict’
inflation targeting and a quadratic loss function, the
(conditional) mean of inflation is not necessarily the optimal
intermediate target, unless uncertainty is additive. In the
simplest one-shot control problem, with a quadratic loss
function, the aim is to minimise the squared mean deviation
of inflation from target plus the variance of inflation.
Unlike the case of additive uncertainty, suppose that the
variance of inflation is influenced by policy. Then the mean
of inflation should be above/below target as the variance of
inflation increases/decreases with tighter policy. This is the
principle of Brainard uncertainty.(1)
As a stylised fact, the level and variance of inflation appear
positively correlated. But it would be wrong to jump to the
conclusion, even in the sort of example at hand, that the
mean of inflation is optimally below target. The (apparently
open) question is not whether the mean and variance of
inflation are positively correlated in general, but whether
they move in the same or opposite directions as policy
varies, holding other factors constant.
Questions of this sort, posed in more realistic settings and
possibly with other loss functions than in the simple
example above, are interesting and potentially important.
Brainard uncertainty is the subject of continuing research at
the Bank of England, and a central theme of the
forthcoming Keynes lecture by Goodhart (1998).

Domestically generated inflation
Let me turn finally from an academic perspective on the
MPC to a practical problem that it has been facing: how
great is the domestic inflationary pressure in the economy,
and what are the immediate prospects for imported
inflation?
The UK inflation target is specified in terms of retail price
inflation (excluding mortgage interest payments). Overall
inflation is a weighted average of domestic inflation and
imported inflation. Imported inflation—ie inflation of the
domestic currency price of imported goods and services—is
strongly influenced by real exchange rate movements.
Given the large real appreciation of sterling (and falls in
world commodity prices) since mid 1996, the imported
component of UK inflation has been negative in the recent

past. But overall inflation has not fallen below target.
Therefore, domestically generated inflation (DGI)—
whatever that may be—must have been significantly above
the target level. A central question for UK monetary policy
has been whether domestically generated inflation can be
brought down in time for overall inflation to stay on target,
once the temporary restraining influence of external factors
wears off.
But what exactly is DGI? How can it be measured? How
does it relate to more familiar measures such as the GDP
deflator? What economic content does DGI have for policy
purposes? In briefly addressing these questions, I shall
draw on the continuing work on DGI at the Bank of
England by David Barker and Willem Buiter (1998), which
contains a much fuller and more rigorous analysis.
In essence, DGI is the inflation rate that would prevail if
there were no external shocks to the economy, such as large
movements in the real exchange rate.(2) External shocks
have direct effects (eg lower sterling prices of imported
goods) and indirect effects (eg via lower demand for UK
exports). It is not practical to answer the full hypothetical
question: what would UK inflation have been if sterling
had not appreciated? But one can attempt to obtain
measures of DGI by removing the direct effects of exchange
rate movements.
DGI differs from RPIX inflation primarily because
import prices affect RPIX. Thus, imported French
wine is a key ingredient of the UK retail product
‘French-wine-in-UK-shops’, and imported automotive
components are often integral to ‘cars-in-UK-showrooms’.
This suggests RPIX excluding import prices as one measure
of DGI. Input-output tables suggest that the (direct and
indirect) import share of the RPIX basket is about 20%.
This, together with the import price deflator from the
National Accounts, allows calculation of the DGI(1)
measure (coloured red) shown in Chart 4.
DGI differs from the GDP deflator primarily because the
latter is the deflator for domestic value added overall—not
just for domestic consumption.(3) This suggests that a
second measure of DGI could be obtained by excluding the
influence of export prices from the GDP deflator. (Care is
needed here to take account of the import component of UK
exports.) The resulting measure is shown as DGI(2)
(coloured blue) in Chart 4.
A third measure can be obtained from unit labour costs.
The rate of unit labour cost inflation measures DGI
imperfectly, because (i) it may differ between the export
sector and the sector producing for domestic consumption,
and (ii) DGI should include unit profit growth in the
domestic sector as well as unit labour cost inflation. A
broad-brush argument suggests that (i) and (ii) may tend to
offset each other. For example, exchange rate appreciation

(1) See Brainard (1967).
(2) DGI can be defined more specifically as the rate of inflation of the deflator for domestic value-added in production for domestic consumption.
(3) Another difference is that, unlike RPIX, the GDP deflator at factor cost excludes indirect taxes.

372

Inflation targeting in practice: the UK experience

Chart 4
Measures of domestically generated inflation
(DGI)
Percentage change on a year earlier
8
DGI(2)
7
6

DGI(1)

policy. So there is no lag between policy and retail price
inflation via the direct exchange rate channel. Of course,
policy also affects the domestic and net trade components of
aggregate demand, with a one-period lag, and aggregate
demand affects domestic inflation, with a lag of a further
period. So the model has a two-period lag between
monetary policy and DGI.

DGI(1): RPIX excluding import prices; DGI(2): GDP deflator excluding export prices;
DGI(3): Unit labour cost inflation.

The optimal reaction functions that Svensson (1998) obtains
for open-economy inflation targeting are not like Taylor
rules, and are sometimes counter-intuitive. For example,
take the case of strict inflation targeting, and suppose that a
recent shock means that DGI is expected to be above target
next period. Sophisticated monetary policy exploits the
powerful direct exchange rate channel to keep expected
overall inflation on target, by engineering a rising real
exchange rate path. By uncovered interest parity, this
requires a policy of initially low, not high, interest
rates.

might (i) cause overall unit labour cost inflation to exceed
domestic unit labour cost inflation, as labour productivity
temporarily declines in the depressed export sector, and
(ii) temporarily boost domestic profit margins, before lower
import costs are fully passed through to consumers. There
is a further question of whether overall unit labour cost
inflation should be calculated on the basis of trend or actual
measured productivity. Chart 4 shows unit labour cost
inflation adjusted for trend productivity as DGI(3) (coloured
green).

Svensson is the first to point out limitations of the model,
and corresponding directions for future work. Let me
underline one of them—the timing, and indeed extent, of
pass-through of exchange rate movements to retail prices.
In recent UK experience, this is by no means instantaneous.
First, it appears that foreign suppliers have widened their
margins on exports to the United Kingdom as sterling has
appreciated.(3) Second, it could be that domestic margins
have widened on products with substantial import
content.

How have these measures of DGI evolved in the period
since sterling left the ERM six years ago? As one would
hope, they all fell substantially below RPIX inflation, before
rising significantly above it following the sharp appreciation
of sterling that began two years ago. The three DGI
measures are currently in a range from about 3% to 41/2%.
As a matter of arithmetic, DGI will have to fall if the
inflation target is to be met, once the restraining influences
of external factors wear off.(1) So what?

Such behaviour is not surprising in theory. Contractual lags,
the nature of oligopolistic interaction, and expectations that
exchange rate movements may be temporary, are just a few
of the reasons why margin adjustment might take time, or
even remain incomplete. But theory has little to say about
the likely lag structure. The challenges facing empirical
work on this topic are also great, not least because of the
difficulty of disentangling other (eg cyclical) influences on
margins.

The answer depends on how much inertia there is in DGI,
and on the lags between monetary policy and DGI. Let me
pursue these points by reference to Svensson’s (1998) model
of inflation targeting in an open economy.(2) In the
aggregate supply equation (Phillips curve) of that model,
DGI (so to speak) depends inter alia on lagged DGI,
previous expectations of DGI, and output gap terms.
Svensson does not attempt to calibrate or estimate his
model, but the parameter on lagged DGI that he selects
implies a significant degree of inertia in DGI.

As for the theory of open-economy inflation targeting, a
good question seems to be the robustness of optimal policy
rules to uncertainty about the timing of exchange rate
pass-through.

5
4
3
2
DGI(3)

1

+
0

–
1
1992

93

94

95

96

97

98

The overall retail price index can jump discontinuously in
the model, because exchange rate movements are assumed
to pass through fully and immediately to domestic prices via
import prices. The exchange rate, being determined by
forward-looking expectations, reacts instantly to monetary

Conclusion
The United Kingdom has almost six years’ experience of
open-economy inflation targeting. During that time,
inflation has been broadly stable, despite large movements
in the sterling exchange rate, and hence in the substantial
component of inflation that is imported.
The job of inflation targeting now rests with the
operationally independent MPC of the Bank of England.
Having outlined the way the MPC operates, I discussed

(1) This point does not depend on the accuracy of the three measures of the DGI. It follows simply from the fact that overall inflation has been above
target, while imported inflation has been well below it.
(2) Another model of open-economy inflation targeting is given by Ball (1998).
(3) See Chart 4.2 on page 34 of the August 1998 Inflation Report.

373

Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin: November 1998

what loss function, reaction function, and intermediate
target an academic observer might ascribe to the MPC. One
theme of that discussion was that it is inevitable that there
will be residual uncertainty about monetary policy
decisions, because the policy reaction function (so to say) in
an ever-changing economic environment is incapable of
being fully expressed. Therefore, monetary policy will
never be completely boring.
I went on to discuss the concept and measurement of
domestically generated inflation, which seems valuable for
the analysis of open-economy inflation targeting. Among
the issues calling for further research—both theoretically

374

and empirically—are the apparently long and variable lags
between exchange rate movements and pass-through to
retail price inflation.
There is a story about the great English cricketer
Geoffrey Boycott—a batsman never suspected of
inflationary tendencies. A boy watching him go in to bat
once shouted: ‘Good luck Geoff!’. Whereupon Boycott
allegedly retorted: ‘It’s not luck—it’s skill’. Given the
uncertainties facing open-economy inflation targeting,
I am not sure that I would give quite such a categorical
reply to well-wishers of the MPC—except, just possibly,
with the benefit of hindsight six years from now.

Inflation targeting in practice: the UK experience

References
Ball, L (1998), ‘Policy Rules for Open Economies’, forthcoming in Taylor, J, ed.
Barker, D and Buiter, W (1998), ‘The Concept and Measurement of Domestically Generated Inflation’, mimeo,
Bank of England.
Barro, R and Gordon, D (1983), ‘A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural Rate Model’, Journal of Political
Economy, 91, pages 589–610.
Bean, C (1997), ‘The New UK Monetary Arrangements: A View from the Literature’, paper presented to HM Treasury
Academic Panel.
Brainard, W (1967), ‘Uncertainty and the Effectiveness of Policy’, American Economic Review, 57, pages 411–25.
Goodhart, C (1998), ‘Central Bankers and Uncertainty’, Keynes Lecture to the British Academy, 29 October.
Haldane, A and Batini, N (1997), ‘Forward-Looking Rules for Monetary Policy’, forthcoming in Taylor, J, ed.
King, M (1997), ‘The Inflation Target Five Years On’, lecture given at London School of Economics on 29 October 1997,
reprinted in Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 37, pages 434–42.
Kydland, F and Prescott, E (1977), ‘Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans’, Journal of Political
Economy, 85, pages 473–92.
Rodgers, P (1998), ‘The Bank of England Act’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol 38, pages 93–99.
Sack, B (1998), ‘Does the Fed Act Gradually? A VAR analysis’, Finance and Economics Discussion Series, Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Svensson, L (1997), ‘Inflation Forecast Targeting: Implementing and Monitoring Inflation Targets’, European Economic
Review, 41, pages 1,111–46.
Svensson, L (1998), ‘Open-Economy Inflation Targeting’, unpublished paper, Institute for International Economic Studies,
Stockholm University.
Taylor, J, ed (1998), Monetary Policy Rules, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, forthcoming.
Wallis, K (1998), ‘Asymmetric Density Forecasts of Inflation and the Bank of England’s Fan Chart’, ESRC Macroeconomic
Modelling Bureau Discussion Paper, No 51, University of Warwick.
Williamson, O (1985), The Economic Institutions of Capitalism, Free Press, New York.

375

