Insights into the future of cash
Speech given by
Victoria Cleland, Chief Cashier and Director of Notes, Bank of England

ATM & Cash Innovation Europe, London
13 June 2017

I would like to thank Kirsty Knott and Callum Miller for their help in preparing this text.

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

We are here today to celebrate an important birthday. Something known to, and used by, the vast majority
of the UK adult population, and which certainly lives up to the motto on its blue plaque “lives made much
easier”. On 27 June 1967, fifty years ago almost to the day, the world’s first cash dispenser was installed in
Enfield, North London. In 1972 following innovation from the cash industry, the machines were linked to a
central system enabling the ‘on line’ cash withdrawals on which so many of us now rely.

Technology had a big impact in 1967 and has since become ever present in our daily lives. We rely on it to
keep us informed about the news, for shopping, for navigating, and keeping in touch with, and even making,
friends. Technology has also had a huge impact on the payments industry. There are now a myriad of
different ways to pay, with digital currencies emerging, mobile payments developing and innovations such as
contactless cards gaining real traction. There is also growing interest in time banking and non-monetary
based exchanges. And we have even considered whether there might be a Bank of England issued digital
currency, but do not envisage this in the foreseeable future.

As a central bank, we welcome this choice. We are neutral to methods of payment, indeed the Bank also
operates, and is in the process of renewing, the Real Time Gross Settlement System. Our objective is to
meet demand for our banknotes. We do not attempt to influence demand but we do seek to understand what
direction cash demand is heading in, to ensure that we are prepared for different future scenarios.

Many people are surprised to learn that demand for cash continues to grow. The value of Bank of England
notes in circulation peaked in the run-up to Christmas 2016, reaching over £70bn for the first time - an
increase of 10% on a year earlier. This is the fastest growth we’ve seen in a decade, and a giant leap
compared to the £2.9bn when the ATM was born.

Strong growth in banknote demand is not unique to the UK. The vast majority of the world is seeing an
increase - and countries including the US, Canada, Australia, and the Euro Area are all experiencing
year-on-year growth in the 5% to 10% range; some countries are well in excess of this. The main outliers
are Sweden, where the value of notes in circulation has been falling for a decade, and Norway which is
experiencing a slight decline in demand. Yet even in Sweden - where homeless people can accept credit
cards for selling Stockholm’s equivalent of the Big Issue - cash still accounts for around 15% of sales and a
new series of banknotes were issued recently.

It is important for the cash industry to understand and respond to demand, and what is driving it. Many
commentators focus on the transactional demand for cash. In the UK the number of payments made in cash
fell 11% to 15.4 billion between 2015 and 2016 - although cash remained the most frequently-used payment
1

method accounting for 40% of all payments and 50% of spontaneous payments .

1

UK Payment Markets (2017)
2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

2

Changing consumer preferences have been instrumental in this shift. The growth in online shopping (up
2

19.5% in the last year ), greater adoption of existing technology such as contactless cards (use of which
tripled in 2016) and mobile payments, and the launch of new apps that can monitor and even restrict
spending for budgeting purposes are all contributing factors.

Analysing such statistics and the presence of a myriad of different payment types has led many to predict the
death of cash. But if we dig further, it is clear that cash is very much alive and kicking. Globally there are
3

over 500 billion banknotes in circulation (nearly 80 per adult) and cash accounts for 85% of transactions .

The total value of cash spending in the UK has stayed relatively stable over the past decade, albeit with a
4

quicker decline in 2016 . ATM withdrawals, the main method of accessing cash, show the aggregate value
of withdrawals have also stayed relatively stable with an average of £192 billion being withdrawn each year
5

over the past decade .

This resilience is because cash is relied on by some and valued by many. 2.7 million people, 5% of UK
5

adults, spread relatively evenly across age groups , rely almost entirely on cash to make their day-to-day
payments.

Cash is valued as a budgeting tool. It is also extremely useful as a contingency as anyone who has tried to
buy a cup of tea on a train with poor signal before, or to catch a cash only taxi in the rain will know! It is often
quicker than the alternatives, is universally accepted, there is immediate certainty the transaction has taken
place, and some value its anonymity from a civil liberties perspective. It is also vital in supporting financial
inclusion.

Looking ahead we need to be alert to factors that could change this transactional demand, such as the
relative costs of payment methods to retailers. Whilst cash is relatively cheap to process at present - 0.15%
6

of tender value compared with 0.22% for debit and 0.79% for credit cards , the gap is narrowing. Were this to
reverse, merchants may look to nudge customers away from cash. Furthermore, actions from government,
for example electronic payment of state benefits, could influence spending behaviour.

But cash is far more than a domestic transaction mechanism. Indeed our research has suggested that
7

between 21% and 27% of cash was held in the domestic transactional cycle in 2014 .

2

Office of National Statistics (2017)
MasterCard (2013)
4
UK Payment Market (2017)
5
Payments Council (2014) and Payments UK (2017)
6
BRC (2015)
7
Fish, T and Whymark, R (2015)
3

3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

3

There is significant overseas demand for our banknotes, particularly the £50. Our research has shown our
8

notes are used by tourists; overseas investors, those looking for a reserve currency as well as expats .
There will also be some cash used in the shadow economy. HMRC estimates that the value of uncollected
9

tax has been broadly stable in the last decade , a time when demand for cash has increased 75%,
suggesting that contrary to some commentators the shadow economy is not a key contributor to the strength
of cash demand.
10

Cash is also used as a store of value, often motivated by having access to cash in case of emergencies .
And some people, despite the FSCS Deposit Protection Scheme, prefer to store funds outside of financial
institutions. Because cash has such a wide range of uses and is valued by different people at different times
for different reasons, it does have a future, and a significant one.

It is therefore crucial that we as a central bank, with a core objective to maintain public confidence in the
availability, quality and security of the currency provide cash that is fit for the future. Our commitment is
demonstrated by our investment in a new series of polymer notes. The Jane Austen £10 will be issued in
September 2017, following the transition to the Churchill £5 in 2016.

The cash industry also has a key role to play, and much of the resilience in cash demand to date is due to
the work of the industry to flex models to meet customer demand. The introduction of the ATM in 1967 was
a key example of this. And since then we have seen deposit-taking ATMs, recycling ATMs, and the ability to
top up your mobile phone and give to charity via an ATM.

The cash industry should not be complacent. There are many alternatives and with time more people will
move to them. The rate of change could increase if the cash industry does not respond by keeping prices
competitive, continuing to innovate, and having a model that can effectively support cash in an environment
of reduced volumes.

Technology is not a threat to cash - it provides opportunities. The Bank has used the latest technology to
introduce state of the art polymer banknotes. Technology helps to authenticate notes, and supports our
11

banknote education efforts, for example the interactive Mobile App . And automation has helped to improve
efficiency, with more of the industry now sorting and recirculating the notes they receive, saving on transit
costs. It is important to continue to ensure that notes remain secure as the industry locally recycles more
notes. The Code of Conduct for the Authentication of Machine Dispensed Banknotes

12

helps to ensure that

recycled banknotes are genuine.

8

Miller, C. (2017)
HMRC (2016)
10
In answer to the question “Why do you keep cash at home rather than in a bank, building society, or credit union?” 43% of 1000
respondents answered “In case I need it for emergencies”. (GfK NOP, 2014)
11
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/banknotes/Pages/banknoteapp/default.aspx
12
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/banknotes/Pages/retailers/codeofconduct.aspx
9

4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

4

In 2017, this Code continues to be strongly supported by industry with many retailers and ATM operators
achieving full compliance. The Code was extended earlier this year to cover Scottish and Northern Ireland
(S&NI) banknotes. We look forward to seeing compliance levels rising for S&NI dispensing machines in the
coming years.

In response to public demand for more £5 notes, the Bank in 2010 set dispense targets for the ATM
operators. The operators rose to the challenge and over the past seven years the number of £5 dispensing
ATMs rose by a factor of 7 to 5,100 ATMs.

The ways that industry worked together to achieve a smooth transition to, and successful distribution of, the
polymer £5 is another case in point. Over 5,000 ATMs and many thousands of self-service checkout
machines were upgraded for the launch, staff were trained to recognise the new security features; and the
wholesale cash industry masterminded the switch over from paper to polymer distribution of around 300
million notes. I do not underestimate the effort required from all of you to make this so successful
- thank you.

Between now and the launch of the Jane Austen £10, the Bank will be seeking assurance that the cash
industry will be ready. We will continue to engage and listen, and will help where we can. In July, we will roll
out training materials for banks and retail staff, alongside a public communication initiative. Together, we
have achieved a great deal over the past few years and as we move closer to launching the new £10, we all
need to retain this momentum.

While reliance on cash is less significant than in the past, it is still crucial to everyday life and I encourage the
cash industry to continue to innovate, to evolve, and to keep cash relevant and fit for purpose. To quote
Jane Austen, or more precisely Mr. Knightley in her novel ‘Emma’, “Surprises are foolish things. The
pleasure is not enhanced, and inconvenience is often considerable”. Understanding the drivers in demand
for cash will help us to avoid surprises.

5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

5

References
BRC (2015), ‘Payments Survey 2015’ available at
https://brc.org.uk/media/103007/brc-payments-survery-2015.pdf
Fish, T and Whymark, R (2015), ‘How has cash usage evolved in recent decades? What might drive
demand in the future?’, Quarterly Bulletin, Bank of England
GfK NOP (2014), Unpublished Bank of England commissioned GfK NOP survey of 1,000 respondents into
the uses of cash.
HMRC (2016), ‘HMRC Measuring tax gaps 2016 edition’ available at
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/561312/HMRC-measuring-taxgaps-2016.pdf
MasterCard (2013), ’Measuring progress towards a cashless society’
http://www.mastercardadvisors.com/_assets/pdf/MasterCardAdvisors-CashlessSociety.pdf
Miller, C. (2017), ‘Addressing the limitations of forecasting banknote demand’ available at
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/banknotes/Documents/about/bundesbankpaper.pdf
Office for National Statistics (2017), ‘Statistical Bulletin: Retail sale in Great Britain: Apr 2017’, available at
https://www.ons.gov.uk/businessindustryandtrade/retailindustry/bulletins/retailsales/apr2017
Payments Council (2014), ‘Cash machines withdrawals’ UK Cash and cash Machines 2014, pp.46.
Payments UK, (2017), ‘UK Payment Administration: ATM market report’
https://www.paymentsuk.org.uk/industry-information/annual-statistical-publications
Payments UK, (2017), ‘UK Payment Market’ available at
https://www.paymentsuk.org.uk/industry-information/annual-statistical-publications

6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

6

