Insurance risk management in a changing world
Speech given by
Charlotte Gerken, Director, Cross-Cutting and Insurance Policy

Bank of America Merrill Lynch 24th Annual Financial CEO conference, London
24 September

Thanks to Anna Lynskey, Dean Minot, Alan Sheppard, Zac Morris-Dyer and Matt Jones.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches

Introduction

Thank you for inviting me to speak to you today.
The theme of this year’s conference is “delivering in a world of extremes.” This seems appropriate for
insurers in all years: for centuries, the industry has delivered security from extreme events, protecting
policyholders from tail risk.
The world in which insurers operate continues to shift. We’re seeing deep and/or fast-moving change in
areas like climate, technology and demographics. On some measures, we’re currently living at the tail of the
distribution in both financial and external conditions.
The complex risks faced by today’s industry would have been unimaginable to the insurers of the past. For
example, when early providers sold protection against peril at sea. Or when the Institute of Actuaries was
created in 1847 with the purpose of applying “the doctrine of probabilities to the affairs of life.” Even in the
recent past, in 2002, when Solvency II was first being debated, the business environment, and in particular
financial market conditions, looked very different from today.

The challenge for the industry today, and for us as regulators, is how we draw from our strong heritage in risk
management to meet the needs and challenges of a changing world. Good risk management has always
been founded in curiosity, especially when it comes to risks in the tails of the distribution. Boards – and
regulators – who regularly ask “what if?” will be better able to spot both possibilities and threats. But risk
management – and regulation - also needs to be flexible and adapt to economic and market conditions,
business strengths and weaknesses.
With this in mind, I’d like to talk to you this morning about the PRA’s expectations of firms in the area of risk
management. And how we are responding to some of the new risks faced by the insurance industry, staying
sensitive to different business models while promoting resilience. Today’s conference is an opportunity to
outline some of the recent policy material we have published that relates to the management of investment
risk. I will also take a look at some of the newer opportunities – and risks – that may not yet have a direct
effect on investment but will do in the future, and how curious, flexible and proportionate risk managers might
respond.
Part 1 – managing investment risk

The PRA has issued quite a lot of guidance around investment risk management since Solvency II was
implemented. Solvency II was originally conceived during a different investment risk environment to what we
have observed over the years since the financial crisis. Since the crisis, spread compression has forced
insurers - like all investors - to adjust target returns and to work harder to achieve those targets. And so 2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches

2

like other investors - insurers are now faced with the challenge of searching for new ways of achieving yield
at a time of historically and enduringly low interest rates and spreads. This is particularly true on the life side,
where longer-dated liabilities increase the importance of achieving a consistent return. And, like other
investors, insurers continue to look for yield in illiquid investments.

The recent trend for investing in illiquids has been particularly marked for annuity providers, incentivised by
the matching adjustment to invest in assets that mirror their illiquid liabilities. While pension freedoms a few
years ago have curtailed the retail annuity market, demand for bulk purchases remains high and growing, as
corporates seek to manage their own exposure to investment risk by reducing their legacy pension risk –
2018 was a record year for transactions.1 With the market growing, firms continue to seek out investments in
illiquid assets such as equity release mortgages and income-producing real estate which offer a higher
expected yield than traded investments and which, as part of a well-diversified portfolio, can be appropriate
to back long-tailed liabilities.

Illiquid assets are by no means a new invention, and some of the risks inherent in long-term investment have
been understood for many years. In 1870 the Spectator published an article on the regulation of life insurers
which began as follows: “a merchant, drawing a bill at 30 years sight, would be considered in the City either
a credulous fool or a man who had adopted a very odd mode of giving away his money.” Today, as insurers
continue to increase their exposure to long-term illiquid assets, it’s worth reminding ourselves of the
particular risks posed by this kind of strategy. First of all, these investments tend not to be traded on
regulated markets and are difficult to value or to sell if it becomes necessary. Predicting how they will
behave under stress is also a challenge.

If an asset is eligible for the matching adjustment, its income profile will mirror the payments due under the
contract it backs. This means that liquidity risk is at least partly mitigated. As we’ve said before [David Rule,
“An Annuity is a Serious Business Pt 2 April 19], the PRA therefore welcomes the trend towards investment
in MA-eligible assets. However, it’s important to remember that liquidity is not the only risk and other risks
created by this kind of investment remain. And these risks may be complex and non-linear such as the No
Negative Equity Guarantee risk in ERMs for example, which can create a contingent concentrated exposure
to residential property. Or they may be binary and inherently unmodellable - climate transition risk for
example - the risk of abrupt repricing of carbon-intensive assets in response to expected or actual regulatory
or societal change. Much of the response to complex or unmodellable risks is not quantitative but qualitative
– the domain of the prudent person principle.

1

“Report: Pension de-risking 2019”, Lane Clark & Peacock LLP, 2019.
3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches

3

Prudent person principle

Solvency II is not known for its lack of detail, but on investment it is remarkably concise. Investment risk is
primarily covered by just two pages of legislation, Article 132, known as the Prudent Person Principle or
PPP. This was not invented by modern regulators: it is another long standing concept.

Originating in Trust

Law, the earliest references we’ve found in case law are from the 1740s. A later, 1883 case highlights: “No
doubt it is the duty of the trustee…to deal with the property entrusted into his care exactly as any prudent
man would deal with his own property. But the words in which the rule is expressed must not be strained
beyond their meaning. Prudent businessmen in their dealings incur risk. This may and must happen in
almost all human affairs.”

The emphasis on judgement and proportion has remained as the PPP has developed over time. It is now a
cornerstone of investment regulation for both Pensions and Insurance. In the context of Solvency II the PPP
sets high level, qualitative standards – for example that investment in non-traded assets should be kept to
prudent levels. It also emphasises the importance of sound risk management and governance.

When implemented effectively, this approach can be powerful. It promotes curiosity, by putting the onus on
firms, and regulators, to really understand the risks faced. It’s also highly flexible, allowing for a range of
reasonable investment strategies and practices, and avoiding crude, top down constraints. This flexibility
means that the PPP facilitates a certain amount of investment risk and is sensitive to different business
models. The trend towards illiquid assets as market conditions have changed is a case in point – these
would have been largely inadmissible under the previous insurance regime.

High-level principles are desirable. However, we have found that in practice, firms have not implemented
them to a consistent standard, taking into account their varying business models, scale and complexity. This
isn't good for the safety and soundness of some of the firms we regulate, or protection of their policyholders – the PRA’s primary objectives. More consistent implementation would also create a more level playing field
for firms, enabling more efficient business and a more competitive marketplace, supporting the PRA’s
secondary competition objective.

In response to increasing supervisory concerns, we published last week a consultation paper which sets out
proposals for a supervisory statement that clarifies how we expect firms to implement the PPP. We have
tried particularly to provide guidance for firms to manage better the risks inherent in illiquid assets. There are
four areas I’d like to highlight:
1. We’ve proposed setting expectations about how firms determine their investment strategy. This includes
considering investment risk in the context of their overall risk appetite. We expect firms to be able to
satisfy us that their appetite for investment risk is in line with the PPP and that the risks they are running
do not exceed their appetite. Some firms are already doing this. One of the best examples we have
4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches

4

seen was a firm that identified risk and reward objectives and provided a detailed framework on their
investment constraints. They also provided clear evidence of how the Board engaged with investment
strategy, and how NEDs provided strong checks and balances over the investment function.

2. Our proposals also include clear expectations on how firms quantify valuation uncertainty and the
potential for volatility. This includes expecting firms to test how investments would affect solvency under
stress. Our analysis suggests that only 3 in 10 firms currently mention valuation uncertainty in their Own
Risk and Solvency Assessment. We have seen some examples of good practice, however. For
example, one firm used multiple valuation techniques when assessing the value of a portfolio of complex
illiquid assets.
3. We’ve emphasised the importance of ensuring that firms have sufficient expertise to understand complex
investments. For example, supervisors noted an insurer bringing in external expertise when it was
considering investing in new asset classes.
4. We’ve also proposed that firms manage concentration risk by setting, justifying and operating internal
exposure limits for investment. We’ve been concerned by some firms building up high concentrations of
illiquid assets. But setting internal limits is already market good practice. For example, we have seen
several insurers deciding to limit exposure to a particular illiquid asset class based on their own
assessment that they posed an ‘unacceptable level of risk’.

Liquidity risk management

A second - very recent - publication concerns liquidity. We published this morning a new supervisory
statement on Liquidity Risk Management for Insurers following a consultation with industry earlier in the year.
While this relates as much to the liability as to the asset side of insurers’ balance sheets, the work on it has
been driven in part by investment trends – increased exposure to illiquid assets – as well as external
developments such as generally lower liquidity in asset and asset financing markets.
In our supervisory statement, we’ve defined key sources of liquidity risk for insurers and expect firms to
develop their own liquidity risk management framework and contingency plan; hold liquidity buffers; and test
liquidity under stress. We recommend a proportionate approach to liquidity and note that for some firms this
is not a major risk. However, for some business models, particularly where firms are using derivatives, we
would expect significant attention to be paid to liquidity risk. Our approach to mitigating liquidity risk reflects
the approach taken by the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS), as part of its Holistic
Framework for Systemic Risk in the Insurance Sector. The Holistic Framework identifies liquidity risk as a
key exposure in the insurance sector that may lead to a systemic impact if left unmanaged; and the IAIS has
consulted on changes to its supervisory material aimed at improving insurers’ management of liquidity risk.

5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches

5

Investments in income-producing real estate

A third publication due out later this week is an update of our existing supervisory statement on illiquid
unrated assets to take into account increasing levels of investment in income-producing real estate. In
particular, we are setting new expectations on how firms identify the risks involved in this kind of investment
and how they estimate credit spreads.

All three pieces of guidance concern fundamental risk management principles, and how we expect firms to
put them into practice. The common theme across the new publications is the need to embed investment
activity within a robust risk management framework. Whatever risks a firm faces, they must be identified,
analysed, managed and mitigated. We’ve emphasised the need for judgement, expertise and Board
engagement.
Returning to the theme of extremes, we’ve set clear expectations for how firms stress-test their investments.
This should complement the PRA’s regular stress-testing exercise where we work with industry to
understand issues including sectoral resilience, systemic risk and the effectiveness of firms’ risk
management. We’ve developed our stresses to take into account the trend towards illiquid investment, for
example this year there is a much deeper analysis of the impact of credit downgrades on Matching
Adjustment portfolios.
Overall, we’re seeking to provide clarity on what we expect from firms and intend that this will help to
encourage consistent implementation of the standards, levelling the playing field to create a more
competitive and robust industry.
Part 2 – what’s on the horizon?
So far today, I’ve focused on areas that could be grouped together under a theme of continuous
improvement. I’d like to turn now to some that are more green-field, opportunities that will no doubt grow in
monetisable value for investment purposes, and the challenges they pose to risk management. The
Governor captured the depth and pace of likely change in his Mansion House speech, which called for a new
finance to meet a new economy, driven by shifts in climate, demography and technology. Some of these
shifts can be seen as a fattening of the tail of existing distributions – the aging population would be an
example. Others, particularly relating to new technology, will require new models entirely.

As regulators, we have a reputation for focussing on downside risk. We do recognise, though, that this new
world is partly one of opportunity and that businesses will need to respond positively to the changes, as well
as managing the risks they pose. Sam Wood’s speech on stylish regulation acknowledged this tension and
emphasised that supporting innovation need not mean deregulation.

6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches

6

Rather it’s about working together to understand the new business models that emerge, and drawing on our
experience to ensure that governance and risk management remain fit for purpose. At the PRA we have
been working hard to ensure that the regime remains responsive to new firms’ business models and new
entrants – for example, through our work to develop and refine the UK’s new regime for Insurance LinkedSecurities, or the launch of our New Insurers Start-Up Unit.
One of the most interesting new sources of risk – and opportunity - is technology. Developments have the
potential to affect product lines, business models and, at the extreme, to shift our paradigm for risk
management.

Starting with cyber risk, this can be easily understood from within existing business models. As businesses,
insurers face the threat of cyber crime. At the same time, demand is growing for cyber insurance, so firms
are taking on this kind of risk from their customers. Solvency II does not mention cyber risk at all, so there is
a space for firms – and regulators – to fill. But the basic framework for dealing with these kinds of business
risks is already well established. And as the regulator we are looking at incorporating this relatively new risk
into our existing approach. For now, this means thinking about capital treatment and reporting and working
with industry to facilitate a move to more explicit coverage, standardisation of contracts and remove barriers
to data sharing.

The bigger unknowns for us are arising from changes in business models. Take cloud outsourcing on which
we have surveyed insurers and are currently analysing results. Insurers increasingly use third party data
storage and processing, development infrastructure and software delivery. Firms have access to cheaper,
more sophisticated IT services, which boosts profits and reduces barriers to entry. But there are also new
risks, for example growing dependency on a few large providers. And as with any fast-moving technology
there is a skills shortage so it’s hard for firms to source the expertise they need to ensure proper governance.

The PRA is responding to this trend and is planning to issue a new supervisory statement on outsourcing in
October. Like our new investment risk management publications, this will emphasize the fundamentals of risk
management. The supervisory statement is intended to provide a one-stop source of reference on
outsourcing and third-party risk management, bringing together previously issued guidance. It also sets out
additional guidance on business continuity and exit strategies. At the same time, we’re finalising policy
proposals to require firms to improve their operational resilience, including making it clear how we expect
them to identify important business services on which they rely.
Some technology developments are creating less tractable risks, for example machine learning. We’re
starting to see hedging models built using neural networks rather than financial mathematics. These models
are black boxes, producing results that are fundamentally unexplainable. Traditional models to which we
apply risk management principles, are built on known logic and it’s possible to determine the key variables
affecting results, and sensitivity of the results to changes in those variables. Machine learning poses
7

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches

7

challenges for a traditional risk management framework based on identifying and analysing key risks and
dependencies. How can a firm’s Board satisfy itself of the model’s prudence and appropriateness for their
business? And regulators are grappling with the question, what does a governance and disclosure
framework look like for a model that cannot be explained?

Conclusion

Before I take some questions that I may stand a better chance of answering, I would like to conclude with
these remarks.
The principles of Solvency II – a whole balance sheet, market consistent approach to regulatory solvency,
focus on good governance – remain valid. Likewise the fundamental risk management principles that
insurers have applied since before any form of regulation still hold. Indeed, in a world of heightened
uncertainty, the management of concentration risk for example – through diversification of both assets and
liabilities, and reinsurance – is more important than ever. Ensuring resilience in a world of extremes requires
curious and flexible risk managers and adaptable risk management actions.

8

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches

8

