International Financial Regulation and Stability
Speech given by
Patricia Jackson, Head of Financial Industry & Regulation Division, Bank of England

At the Finance and Regulation Seminar Series at the Judge Institute of Management
8 March 2002

The views expressed here are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of
England or the Basel Committee. I am grateful to colleagues in the Bank of England for helpful
comments and to Inke Nyborg for carrying out background research.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2

International Financial Regulation and Stability
Since 1988 international minimum capital standards produced by the Basel Committee on
Banking Supervision have formed the cornerstone of bank regulation across the globe. In the
EU the Basel Capital Accord is the basis for the EU banking Directives, particularly in
respect of solvency and own funds, which are legally binding in all Member States. And in
over 100 countries worldwide the Accord has been enshrined in domestic bank regulations.
This paper examines the reasons for international agreements on financial regulation and
considers whether the drivers are the same as those behind domestic financial regulation, in
particular regulation of banks.
Reasons for domestic regulation of banks
There has been an understanding for two hundred years that weakness in the banking sector
may have wider effects. Thornton (1802) recognised that problems in one bank could spill
over into more widespread difficulties in the sector. The nature of the contracts which banks
hold (short-term deposits and longer-term loans) exposes them to the possibility of runs.
More recent papers (e.g. Bernanke, 1983) have highlighted the wider costs to the economy if
banks fail because of their central position in the payments system and their special role in
intermediating funds to small firms and the retail sector. Concerns that banks can pose
threats to the system initially led to the development of lender of last resort facilities,
restricted in theory to solvent banks in liquidity difficulty, but over time has also led to the
development of supervision of banks to reduce the likelihood of failure. Domestic regulation
is a response to the gap between the private cost of failure of a bank and the public cost. But
it is also a response to the moral hazard which comes out of other arrangements to protect the
system or depositors. Extensive safety nets or deposit protection arrangements reduce the
effectiveness of market discipline which is also affected by the substantial asymmetries of
information between banks and the markets given historic cost accounts (see Jackson and
Lodge, 2000) and between banks and their depositors.
The factors behind domestic regulation of banks are therefore the following:

3
(1)

The potential externalities stemming from bank failures which mean that the social cost
of failure is higher than the private cost - resulting from:
(a)

Risks of contagion between banks exacerbated by the risk of runs given the nature
of banks’ deposit and loan contracts.

(b)

The special role that banks play in the real economy because of their central role
in the payments system and in lending to small business and retail.

(2)

The asymmetry of information between the market, depositors and banks which reduces
market discipline.

(3)

Moral hazard caused by other mechanisms which have developed to deal with the
problems in banks – lender of last resort and deposit protection.

All of these provide a motivation for domestic regulation but not necessarily international
minimum standards. To consider the reasons behind international regulation it is worth
reviewing the factors which led to the original Accord.
Competitive pressures on capital
Before the agreement on the 1988 Basel Accord, countries were developing rather different
approaches to prudential supervision. The United Kingdom had gone down the route of
broad risk weights. A 1980 Bank of England paper ‘The Measurement of Capital’ set out a
risk weighting structure for bank assets. The United States had first begun to move to
establish minimum regulatory capital ratios in 1981 and by 1985 had developed a minimum
leverage ratio approach – primary capital (equity and loan loss reserves) to total
on-balance-sheet and off-balance-sheet assets of 5.5% and total capital (including limited life
preferred stock, subordinated debt and some intangibles) to total assets of 6%. In Japan the
leverage ratio for all banks was 4% [(capital without equity revaluation gains)/(total assets
including an amount corresponding to guarantees)]. In addition, banks with foreign
branches/subsidiaries had to satisfy 6% [(capital and 70% of equity revaluation gains)/(total
assets including amount corresponding to guarantees)]. Many countries had prudential
approaches but without fixed minima. At the same time competitive pressures between the

4
major banks had grown substantially with the development of the syndicated loans market
where the big international banks competed head to head.
Chart 1
Data on $US equivalent amount of new
syndicated loan issuance for the global
syndicated loan market

US$ trillions
2.5
2
1.5

1
0.5
0
1980

1983

1986

1989

1992

1995

1998

2001

Source: Dealogic

The highly competitive nature of the euro credit market led to continual downward pressure
on spreads and there was a concern that there was a link between pricing and capital. It was
felt that banks which held less capital to back the loans were prepared to price them more
finely, forcing other banks to reduce their pricing or lose market share in what was seen as an
important strategic market. The chart below sets out the average spread over LIBOR on new
US$ syndicated loans. It clearly shows the pressure on spreads in the market in the early to
mid 1980s.

5
Chart 2
Data for the US$ syndicated loan market on
the average spread over libor at issuance

LIBOR Pricing
(weighted average)

250
200
150
100
50
-

Jan.
80

Jan.
84

Jan.
88

Jan.
92

Jan.
96

Jan.
00

Source: Dealogic

Domestic markets for loans to large corporates were also becoming more contestable. In
effect, for large corporates, an international market was growing even for loans in the
domestic currency of the borrower. By 1986, 39% of loans to the UK non-bank private sector
by banks operating in the United Kingdom were accounted for by foreign-owned banks and in
terms of domestic currency loans the percentage was 27%.
Equity as a percentage of assets held by the banks had been declining across many banking
systems since the 19th century – see chart below – and the concern was that the intense
competitive pressure in some markets would lead to further erosion. Another concern was
that many exposures of banks had moved off balance sheet because of the development of the
swaps and derivatives markets. These increased the effective leverage ratios from the late
1970s – capital was falling relative to the risks.

6
Chart 3: Bank’s equity capital as a percentage of total assets

United States of America
United Kingdom
Switzerland

Per
60
50
40
30
20
10

0
1840 1860 1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000
Source: B ank of England, Federal R eserve B oard and Swiss N ational B ank
estim ates. The data for each country w ere developed from different sources
over tim e, with different accom panying standards and therefore only
illustrate long-run trends.

These data for banks’ equity capital as a percentage of assets are not risk adjusted and risk
controls have probably substantially improved since the 19th century - although it is
noticeable that the incidence of banking crises does not appear to have fallen. Work by
Bordo et al 2001 indicated that the period of exceptional instability for banking crises was the
inter-war period (closely followed by the period after 1973). In contrast, banking crises were
less frequent prior to 1913. The decline in the equity/asset ratio acceptable to the market
since the 19th century may also have reflected the development of official intervention in the
banking sector – lender of last resort, deposit protection arrangements and also a growing
belief in the markets that some banks were simply too big to fail.
One factor behind the development of an international minimum floor for capital adequacy
was a desire to place a peg in the ground and effectively prevent further erosion of capital
requirements. There was a concern that, without an international agreement on a minimum
level, supervisors would come under intense pressure gradually to relax domestic standards
(competition in laxity).

7
The 1998 Accord which set a minimum capital standard for risk assets of internationally
active banks of 8% Tier 1 plus Tier 21 and 4% Tier 1, was followed by an increase in the risk
asset ratio in a number of G10 countries – the average ratio of capital to risk-weighted assets
in the G10 rose from 9.3% in 1988 to 11.2% in 1996 (see Jackson et al 1999). But market
pressure on countries regarding the level of prudential requirements can be seen in the
experience of Denmark, which weakened its prudential rules to bring them into line with the
Basel Accord.
In effect the international agreement came to be seen as an essential underpinning of effective
domestic regulation.
The design of international capital requirements
The way that internationally agreed minimum standards are designed can itself potentially
affect financial stability. The original Accord represented a major advance but over time the
broad risk bands which gave little differentiation between loans to private sector non-bank
borrowers gave scope for regulatory arbitrage. Banks could securitise their higher quality
assets and reduce the actual coverage of risk by capital even though their risk asset ratio
remained unchanged (Jones, 2000). By March 1998 outstanding non-mortgage securitisations
by the ten largest US bank holding companies amounted to around $200bn (more than 25% of
these banks’ risk weighted assets) – see Jackson et al 1999.
The new Accord is being designed to make the risk weights sensitive to the risks of individual
assets. This will reduce the gap between the economic capital assessments for high quality
loans and the required capital. But risk sensitive approaches to setting capital raise their own
financial stability issues. The Committee is now focussing on how best to reduce the risk that
risk sensitive capital requirements could increase the likelihood of credit crunches. The
existing accord is potentially procyclical because although risk weights on individual assets
remain fixed over the cycle, capital declines in a recession because of write offs and specific
provisions. There was a concern that the fixed minimum capital under Basel 1 could lead to
credit crunches and there is limited evidence for the US in the early 1990s that it might have

1

Broadly speaking, capital is defined as Tier 1 comprising equity and disclosed reserves and Tier 2 comprising
subordinated debt and general provisions

8
affected lending in some states (Hancock and Wilcox, 1997, Hancock and Wilcox, 1998 and
Peek and Rosengren, 1997).
Under the new Accord an additional element of procyclicality will be added by the capital
requirements on non-defaulted assets which under the international ratings approach will vary
according to the probability of default rating assigned by the bank. There will be no extra
capital requirement on defaulted assets if expected losses are fully provided against. A
number of papers have explored whether the new risk sensitive requirements will
significantly increase the likelihood of credit crunches in recessions. For banks using the
internal probability of default rating schemes it seems to depend on whether a bank is using a
scheme where ratings are conditioned on the point in the cycle rather than taking into account
different possible economic states (see Catarineu et al, 2002). It also of course depends on the
steepness of the risk weight curves used by the Committee.
The Committee is considering using rather flatter curves than originally proposed at least in
part because of this concern about procyclicality. There is also an active debate over whether
banks should be required to use ratings which are not conditioned on the point in the
economic cycle and also whether a mechanism such as stress testing should be developed to
ensure that capital is built up when risks are taken (in booms) not just when they are realised
(in recessions).
This highlights the interrelationship between the design of capital requirements and the macro
economy.
Another type of concern has been that regulation, by standardising some of the models used
by banks, could increase herding. This criticism has been levelled at the VaR models used by
banks to assess capital requirements on trading book positions (Persaud, 2000). The Basel
Committee allowed models with different designs but they had to conform to a common
confidence level and back data period. There is in fact little evidence of effects of this kind.

9

Market discipline
One important issue is whether the market would have effectively placed a break on any
erosion in bank capital had the G10 not acted. This begs the question how effective market
discipline is for banks. Crockett (2001) argues that there are four prerequisites for market
discipline of banks to be effective – the market must have sufficient information, the ability to
process it, the right incentives to process it and the mechanisms to exercise effective
discipline.
In terms of the last factor, the developments in banking in the last 20 years have substantially
increased market discipline on large banks. Even banks with a large retail deposit base are
dependent on the willingness of their counterparties to set the limits for exposures to them
necessary for the bank to carry out the different transactions to hedge its books, and
participate in the payments systems and FX market. For the largest banks this must exert a
substantial discipline. One large bank indicated that swap trading to hedge its own positions
can amount to around £20 billion a month. The last BIS survey of Foreign Exchange Activity
(1998) showed that turnover in OTC derivatives in the London market in April 1998
amounted to $591 billion a day. There is some evidence (see Jackson, Perraudin and Saporta
2002) that a bank’s ability to transact large volumes of swaps depends on its external credit
rating. Lower-rated banks may still have access to the markets but would have to collateralise
their exposures. The limits set for activity with them would also be lower. This is consistent
with US evidence as well. Bhasin (1995) finds that OTC derivative users are consistently and
significantly more highly rated than other firms in general. Gunther and Siems (1995) find a
positive relationship between capitalisation and participation in the OTC market.
But the importance for a bank of its external rating does not actually place a floor on its
capital. This is because ratings are not simply a measure of the financial standing of a bank
but also reflect the likelihood of support either from a shareholder or in the case of large
banks more usually the government. Market discipline applying through the ratings is
therefore intrinsically contaminated by the market belief that some banks might receive
support. Other types of market discipline (for example the pricing of subordinated debt) will

10
also be contaminated by expectations of support unless governments have made it clear that
no subordinated debt holder will ever be bailed out.
FitchIBCA provide a separate rating for the likelihood that a bank will receive support and
state that an obligor’s long-term bond rating is arrived at by combining the independently
determined stand-alone ratings and the support ratings. Jackson, Perraudin and Saporta
(2002) used an ordered probit model in which dummies for the different stand-alone and
support ratings act as explanatory variables to estimate the support free ratings for G10 banks
rated by FitchIBCA at end -1998. The chart below shows the distribution of actual long-term
ratings and support free ratings for the 251 G10-rated banks. The median rating falls from
AA- to A after the adjustment to remove support.

Chart 4: Comparison of unadjusted with adjusted distribution of ratings

30

25

20

Actual

15

Adjusted

10

5

0
AAA

AA+

AA

AA-

A+

A

A-

BBB+

BBB

BBB-

B+

Long-term ratings

The degree of implicit or even overt support for the largest banks varies across countries. The
chart below sets out the average FitchIBCA support rating for all banks in a country with Tier
1 and Tier 2 capital larger than €3bn. FitchIBCA support ratings range from 1 (a bank for
which there is a clear legal guarantee on the part of the state or a bank of such importance that

11
support from the state is judged as likely to be forthcoming) to 5 (a bank for which support
cannot be relied upon).

Table 1: Average Fitch Support ratings
Country
Belgium
Canada
France
Germany
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
UK
US

Average Fitch
Support rating
as at end 2001
2.00
2.00
2.50
1.67
2.33
1.86
1.67
2.00
2.00
1.00
2.50
4.25

If some supervisors had gone down the route of weakening their standards (or had not
introduced a standard) then they could well have been forced to combine this approach with
growing use of implicit or explicit support mechanisms. Indeed once whole banking systems
become weakened the support has to become more and more explicit – for example, in 1996
the Japanese government guaranteed fully the non-equity liabilities of Japanese banks for a
five year period, since extended.
Even without the contamination of market discipline by implicit or explicit support there is a
question of how effective market discipline of banks is given the opacity of bank accounts. In
some countries (eg, Germany) profits continue to be smoothed and in almost all countries
historic cost accounting does not disclose any embedded interest rate or credit losses already
in the book. An exception is Denmark where accounts are adjusted to take losses of this kind
into account (see Jackson and Lodge 2000).

12
It is also very difficult for an outside party to assess the riskiness of a bank’s portfolio without
using measures such as volatility of earnings as a proxy. Here the Basel Accord provided a
valuable mechanism to compare banks on the same basis - the risk weights were universally
employed and the ratio of capital to risk-weighted assets therefore provides a common
measure. The broad weighting bands did not provide a fine-tuned risk adjustment but they did
take into account the proportion of the book in government bonds and retail mortgages
against other risks. The Basel Accord also took into account off-balance-sheet exposures
such as swaps and provided a common measure of capital. The Accord may well have made it
easier for market discipline to operate by providing a common framework for assessing
banks.
The Accord has become a floor against which banks are measured and many banks choose,
because of market pressures, to operate well above it. The minimum nature of the Accord is
especially apparent with regard to Tier 1 – a bank must hold at least 4% of Tier 1 (equity and
reserves) against risk weighted assets. Jackson, Perraudin and Saporta (2002) show that the
current Accord delivers a confidence level for large banks with high quality books of around
99.9% (equivalent to the upper end of BBB) and around 99% (BB) for banks with lower
quality portfolios. In contrast the banks generally employ solvency standards substantially
higher than this level leading to much higher Tier 1 levels being employed by some banks –
see charts below which show capital ratios of G10 banks with Tier 1 plus Tier 2 capital of
more than €3bn.
Chart 5: Tier 1 risk asset ratio

Chart 6: Tier 1 plus Tier 2 risk asset ratio
Per cent
30

Per cent
30

25

25

20

20

15

15

10

10

5

5

0
1

51

Source: Bankscope

101

151

0
1

51

Source: Bankscope

101

151

13
In one important respect the Basel Accord did not deliver a common framework. The
Committee had defined allowable capital and had set the weights to give the risk adjusted
assets, but had not felt able to override local accounting practice with regard to impaired
assets. This has severely affected comparability in the risk asset ratios. If banks have not
adequately provided against impaired loans, capital can be substantially overstated.
Increasing securitisation of higher quality assets, particularly by US banks, has also affected
the comparability of the risk asset ratios.
Risk of contagion
One of the core reasons for domestic prudential regulation of banks is the risk of contagion if
a bank fails because of both direct exposures and the risk that problems in one bank may be
seen as indicative of problems in other banks. There are similar linkages between large
international banks with very large direct exposures between them and also the potential for
concerns to develop because of problems in common areas of business - although the latter
may be less of a concern than is the case in a domestic banking system, such as the
United Kingdom, where some of the largest banks are almost mirror images of each one
other.
The United Kingdom has, of course, a particularly open and international banking system and
here the cross exposures between UK banks and markets and foreign banks are very large.
The table below sets out the number of branches and subsidiaries of foreign banks in the
United Kingdom.
Table 2: Foreign banks’ branches and subsidiaries in the UK
Branches Subsidiaries
EEA
112
10
US
18
19
Japan
12
5
Other developed
18
13
Emergina markets (remainder)
70
29
Total
230
76
Source: FSA Banking Act List, October 2001

Total
122
37
17
31
99
306

14
More important than the sheer number of foreign banks operating in the London market is the
size of the exposures between different groups of banks. The Bank carried out a review of the
large exposures returns supplied by banks to the FSA at June 2000. These data, which show
the 20 largest exposures to individual counter-parties plus any others over 10% of a bank’s
regulatory capital, indicate very substantial interconnections.

Table 3: Exposures of large UK banks to non-UK banks

UK commercial
banks

EEA
Swiss
US
Japanese
Other

114.9
14.3
32.6
9.7
6.4

£bn
UK mortgage banks

19.6
1.8
4.3
0.2
0.9

At end-2001, the UK commercial banks together had Tier 1 capital of £65bn and the UK
mortgage banks together had Tier 1 capital of £24bn. These potential exposures are therefore
very large in relation to the UK banks’ capital. The large exposures figures are only
indicative because they may reflect limits which are rarely fully drawn down and some
exposures may be collateralised but they indicate the potential size of exposures to other
entities on a consolidated basis.
Other Bank data show the extent to which the whole London market (all banks resident in the
United Kingdom) is exposed to foreign banks operating in the United Kingdom. These
exposures are drawn rather than limits but some may be collateralised. These data too point
to huge exposures.

15
Table 4: London market exposures to groups of foreign banks resident in UK
Interbank deposits – excluding repos (as at Q3 2001, in £bn)
£
Swiss

Euro

Other

Total

1.9

1.9

5.8

9.6

19.8

6.6

19.0

45.4

Japan

3.6

2.2

3.4

9.3

Other developed

7.9

2.0

5.4

15.3

United States

9.3

13.6

18.2

41.0

EU

Source: Bank of England MFSD
The London market does not mean just UK banks. The foreign banks are themselves part of
the London market and so, for example, an exposure between two Swiss banks resident in the
UK would appear as a Swiss exposure to the London market.
The swap market has significantly increased the interlinkages between the largest banks
because interest rate risks tend to be laid off with a small number of large swap counterparties
leading to sizeable credit exposures from contracts with a positive value. The data below
relate to a sample of 37 banks in the UK system (3 Swiss, 7 EU, 10 Japanese, 6 US, 8 UK and
3 other developed). The table shows the market value of the gross liabilities of these banks to
the rest of the London market relating to foreign exchange and interest rate swaps.
Table 5: London market swap exposures (interest rate and FX) to groups of foreign
banks resident in the UK (as at Q3 2001, in £bn)
£

Euro

Other

Total

Swiss

4.42

6.5

12.48

23.4

EU

2.21

3.38

5.59

11.18

Japan

2.6

1.82

2.73

7.15

Other developed

0.91

0.65

0.65

2.08

United States

4.68

24.05

32.5

61.23

Source: Bank of England MFSD

16

These cross exposures between domestic and foreign banks create a tension vis-à-vis one
country’s goal for safety and soundness. Whereas a country which was concerned to limit the
potential disruption to its markets from bank failures would choose to set an appropriate
prudential regime for its banks, the prudential regime for a foreign bank is largely set by its
own domestic authority. For branches of foreign banks operating in the United Kingdom,
capital adequacy is set by the home authority for the whole bank. There is no concept in the
UK (unlike the US) of branch solvency where the assets in the branch can be used to pay
domestic creditors. This is because of the difference in solvency law. The UK uses the single
entity doctrine where a bank and its branches are wound up as a single entity, whereas the US
uses a separate entity doctrine with US branches being wound up separately.
Even in the case of subsidiaries, where separate capital requirements are set, the soundness in
fact depends on the soundness of the whole bank. Confidence would fall if the rest of the
bank were in difficulty, causing liquidity problems for the subsidiary. In an open market such
as the United Kingdom, the quality of home country supervision and the capital rules being
imposed are therefore very important. Here international capital agreements have a very
important role to play. In the UK many of the largest overseas bank operations have been in
branches rather than subsidiaries which is probably related to the fact that the UK authorities
have generally required more capital of banks operating in the UK than the Basel minimum.
A branch can operate on the Basel minimum.
In the EU agreed minimum capital standards are particularly important because a member
country cannot deny a bank established elsewhere in the EU the right to establish a branch in
their jurisdiction. This is known as the right to passport.
Beyond capital, the adequacy of the whole prudential regime is important. The early work of
the Basel Committee focussed on this aspect of international banking – see Appendix. A key
potential risk with banking groups is that parts may be supervised and parts may not be which
could weaken the whole structure. For example, debt taken on by a holding company can be
downstreamed as equity to a subsidiary making the subsidiary look sound even though it was

17
part of a very highly geared group. The 1975 Basel Concordat established a division of
responsibilities among national supervisors to try to ensure that there were no gaps in the
supervisory net caused by foreign operations of banks. It established the principle of
consolidated supervision. Home-country supervisors would monitor the risk exposure of the
whole banking group. In 1992, following the closure of BCCI, the Committee agreed
minimum standards for the Supervision of Cross Border Establishments. This required that
the host country into whose jurisdiction a foreign bank was trying to expand would determine
whether the bank and the home-country supervisor had the necessary capabilities to meet the
minimum standards laid down by the Committee.
The Basel Accord focussed on a minimum standard for capital and it has not been mirrored
by minimum standards for liquidity. This is in part because this was not seen as an area
where there was pressure for competition in laxity. It was also because any liquidity rules
would clearly need to reflect local market conditions, the behaviour of local depositors and so
on. But this is an area where the Committee has given guidance and where more work is
likely to be carried out in the future.
Disruption to the real economy
Besides the direct channel for systemic risk to spread via interbank exposures, in a domestic
context real economic effects are also felt through disruption to intermediation. Some
borrowers (small and medium-sized enterprises) and the personal sector are dependent on
bank lending and cannot access the securities markets directly. In terms of international
contagion this is perhaps less of a concern. Although foreign banks operating in the
United Kingdom account for a sizeable proportion of lending to the UK private sector (25%
at December 2001) and within this 40% to private non financial corporations, most is
accounted for by lending to the UK large corporates which have access to other sources of
funds. But it is still possible that a severe problem in the foreign-owned banks could result in
some disruption in lending to UK borrowers. A reduction in bank lending from Japan to the
rest of South East Asia seems to have affected growth in the region. Japanese lending started
to fall in 1997 Q2 ahead of the South East Asian crisis.
Another route between systemic problems in one country and the economic health of other
countries lies in trade. Hoggarth, Reis and Saporta (2002), review the estimates of output

18
losses during 47 banking crises in 37 countries over the period 1977-98. They find that
output losses are large – amounting to around 15%-20% of annual GNP. They also find that,
on some measures, the costs are as high or higher in developed as in emerging markets.
Severe banking crises are therefore likely to affect the major trading partners of the country
affected. In an international context the potential welfare costs of weak banking systems is
larger than the costs to the country directly affected. This is a particular concern in free trade
areas such as the EU which have resulted in very close links between the participating
countries. France and Italy export 16.3% of total exports to Germany and Ireland exports
21.7% to the UK. 11.1% of UK exports go to Germany and 9.2% to France.
The trade channel widens the interest in international sound banking beyond just the large
banks with substantial interconnections in the world banking markets. A country with large
numbers of smaller, weak banks might not expose other banking systems directly. But if
those banks were supplying important parts of the domestic economy with credit, the
economic consequences of severe problems could spill over into its trading partners.
The IMF has recognised the importance of encouraging a general strengthening in financial
systems through the FSAP programme, established in May 1999. It is a joint
IMF/World Bank approach to improving the soundness of financial systems in member
countries. Supported by experts from a range of national agencies and standard-setting bodies
the programme seeks to identify the strengths and vulnerabilities of a country’s financial
system; to determine how key sources of risk are being managed; to ascertain the sector’s
developmental and technical assistance needs; and help prioritise policy responses.
Securities Firms
The international minimum prudential standards for banks have not been mirrored by agreed
minimum standards for securities firms. IOSCO (the International Organisation of Securities
Commissions, which brings together member agencies with the aim of co-operating to
achieve high standards of regulation and to share information on their experience in their
domestic markets) produces papers making recommendations about best practice but without
seeking agreement for universal adoption of one approach. In the EU there are agreed
minimum standards based on the Basel rules for bank trading books so that securities firms
can passport from one jurisdiction to another within the EU.

19
In part the different paths taken must reflect the traditional view of the special systemic nature
of banks which led to the establishment of banking supervision within the central banks in
most countries initially (see Jackson 2000) and to the G10 central bank governors taking the
lead in establishing the Basel Committee. In fact the international minimum prudential
standards for banks were a central bank initiative stemming from financial stability concerns.
There have been no parallel central banking initiatives regarding securities firms. But it also
reflects the fact that in many countries, securities activity is solely within the banks and
covered by Basel and in others securities firms are small relative to the banks. The only
countries with very large stand-alone securities firms are the United States and Japan. There
are fundamental differences between the approaches to supervising these standalone securities
firms and those adopted by Basel. In particular regulation of the US securities firms does not
accord with one of the basic Basel precepts – consolidated supervision of the whole group.
The principle behind SEC regulation is that the registered/broker dealer can be wound down
without loss to creditors. Unregulated entities are outside the broker/dealer although the SEC
is now extending some form of generalised oversight beyond the broker/dealer.
The LTCM case did highlight the potential threat to markets if a very large counterparty fails
leading to large quantities of collateral having to be sold. This led to a study by the Financial
Stability Forum and recommendations about the links between regulated and unregulated
entities.
There are now growing links between banks and insurance companies highlighting the
different capital requirements required for the same risks. This is because banks can transfer
credit risk to insurance companies using a variety of mechanisms (Rule 2001). The new
Basel Accord, which will have much higher capital requirements for low quality credits, may
well encourage even greater use of insurance to transfer the risk. The Joint Forum, which
involves bank, securities firms and insurance regulators, together with finance ministries and
central banks, is considering the differences in approach to setting capital for the different
types of firm.
Conclusion
There are parallels between the factors leading to domestic regulation of banks and
international agreements on minimum standards.

20
·

The risk of contagion between large internationally active banks is as high as the risks
within some domestic markets.

·

The externalities of a domestic banking crisis are also high in an international context.
Banking crises can reduce GNP by 10% to 20% during the crisis which will have large
knock on effects on trading partners particularly in free trade areas such as the EU.

But international standards were also seen as an essential underpinning of effective domestic
regulation. International minimum standards for banks were a response to a financial stability
concern that there could be competition in laxity between authorities driven by the growing
international banking markets and the perceived effect of capital requirements on banks’
ability to compete.
The way in which standards are designed can also have financial stability implications. There
were concerns that fixed minimum requirements under Basel could create credit crunches and
there are now concerns that procyclical requirements under Basel II may exacerbate the effect.

Minimum standards for banks have not been mirrored by parallel internationally agreed
minimum standards for securities firms (except within the EU) perhaps because the systemic
effects of crises are seen as smaller but also because there are fewer large standalone
securities firms and they compete with banks in only some markets.
There are growing indications that credit risk is likely to be transferred from banks to
insurance companies which is leading to increasing interest in the different capital regimes for
the same risk and this may eventually led to pressure for international harmonization in this
area.

Appendix
THE BASEL COMMITTEE
The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision is made up of representatives from the G10
plus Switzerland, Luxembourg and Spain. Each country has a representative from the central
bank and, if separate, from the agency responsible for banking supervision. It was established
at the end of 1974 following the collapse of Bankhaus Herstatt in West Germany and other
market disruptions. The first meeting took place in February 1975. Initially it discussed
international co-operation in order to close supervisory gaps but it has also had a wider
objective of improving the quality of banking supervision worldwide. The Committee
reaches agreements which the members have said they will abide by but they do not have
legal force. Agreements are reached through consensus, not through formal voting. The
Committee reports to the Committee of Central Bank Governors of the Group of Ten
countries. There is also from time to time a joint meeting of the G10 Governors and the
Heads of Banking Supervision in the G10 to discuss major initiatives.
Principles for the supervision of banks’ foreign establishments
In 1975 the Committee agreed the Basel Concordat (BCBS, 1975), which laid down a
division of responsibilities among national authorities to try to ensure that there were no gaps
in the supervisory net caused by the foreign operations of banks. It established that the home
country supervisor of the parent bank was responsible for the prudential supervision of
branches of foreign banks but the local or host supervisor was responsible for subsidiaries. It
was amended in 1983 to ensure that where host supervision of subsidiaries was not adequate,
the home supervisor should extend their supervision or discourage the bank from retaining
the subsidiary. Where the host supervisor felt that the home supervisor was inadequate it
would forbid the operation access to their jurisdiction or impose conditions on the conduct of
business. It established the principle of consolidated supervision for the first time. Host
country supervisors were responsible for the foreign establishments operating in their
territories (financial soundness of foreign branches and solvency for subsidiaries) but the
home country supervisors would monitor the risk exposure of the whole banking group as
well as the adequacy of their capital on the basis of the totality of the business. Regarding

2
liquidity the host authority was responsible for monitoring the liquidity of foreign branches
and subsidiaries but the home authority was responsible for monitoring the liquidity of the
group as a whole.
In 1992, following the closure of BCCI, the Committee agreed minimum standards for the
supervision of international banking groups and their cross-border establishments (BCBS,
1992). This required that a host country into whose jurisdiction a foreign bank was trying to
expand would determine whether the bank and the group’s home-country supervisor had the
necessary capabilities to meet minimum standards laid down by the Committee. The home
authority should monitor banks’ global operations on the basis of verifiable consolidated data,
be able to prohibit corporate structures which impede supervision and be able to prevent
banks from establishing a presence in suspect jurisdictions. The Committee laid down that:
(1)

All international banking groups and international banks should be supervised by a
home country authority that capably performs consolidated supervision.

(2)

The creation of a cross border banking establishment should receive the prior consent of
both the host country supervisory authority and the bank’s and, if different, the banking
group’s home country supervisory authority.

(3)

Supervisory authorities should possess the right to gather information from the
cross-border banking establishments of the banks or banking groups for which they are
the home country supervisor.

(4)

If a host country authority determines that any one of the foregoing minimum standards
is not met to its satisfaction, that authority could impose restrictive measures necessary
to satisfy its prudential concerns consistent with these minimum standards, including
the prohibition of the creation of banking establishments.

Minimum capital standards
The 1988 Basel Capital Accord set 8% as the minimum ratio of capital to risk-weighted
assets for internationally active banks in the G10 (BCBS, 1988), but it has since been adopted
by over 100 countries worldwide. It uses a simple weighting structure designed to reflect the

3
riskiness of the assets, with most claims on the private sector weighted at 100%, claims on
banks in the OECD and under one year claims on other banks weighted at 20% and claims on
OECD governments zero weighted. There was a limited recognition of collateral. Capital
was defined as Tier 1 comprising equity and disclosed reserves and Tier 2 comprising
subordinated debt and general provisions and other reserves which met certain conditions.
The Accord included a way of measuring the potential future exposure of derivatives and
contracts for difference.
In 1996, the Accord was amended to cover market risk for trading book positions and FX and
commodity exposures (BCBS, 1996). Banks were offered the choice between a standard
approach with percentage capital requirements or the use of their own value-at-risk models
subject to conditions laid down by the Committee. The models must be built to deliver a
confidence interval of 99.5%, using at least one year’s back returns data and losses must be
calculated to cover a 10-day holding period. The capital requirement is the higher of the
latest daily VaR or three times the two-month moving average of daily VaRs.
The main Accord is currently being revised to make it more risk based (BCBS, 2001). The
risk weighting of credit risk exposures will be based on external ratings in a standardised
approach and on banks’ own internal assessment of probability of default in a foundation
internal ratings approach (and in an ‘advanced approach’ also on banks’ assessment of loss
given default). The new Accord will be based on three pillars – Pillar 1 will set minimum
capital requirements for the banking book (credit risk and equity risk) plus an operational risk
charge and Pillar 2 will establish a framework whereby supervisors will require banks which
have a higher risk profile relative to their capital to either reduce their risks or increase their
capital. Pillar 3 will require banks to disclose more information about their risk profile to
increase market discipline.

4
Bibliography:
Bank of England (1980), ‘The measurement of capital’, September 1980
BCBS (1975), ‘Report to the Governors on the supervision of banks’ foreign establishments
(original Concordat)’, Bank of International Settlements
BCBS (1988), ‘International convergence of capital measurement and capital standards’,
Bank of International Settlements
BCBS (1992), ‘Minimum standards for the supervision of international banking groups and
their cross-border establishments’, Bank of International Settlements
BCBS (1996), ‘Amendment to the Capital Accord to incorporate Market Risks’, Bank of
International Settlements
BCBS (2001), ‘The New Basel Accord’, Bank of International Settlements
Bernanke, B (1983), ‘Non-monetary effects of the financial crisis in the propagation of the
Great Depression’, American Economic Review, Vol.73
Bhasin, V (1995), ‘On the credit risk of OTC derivative users’, Federal Reserve Board
working paper 95-50, November.
Bordo, M and Eichengreen, B, Klingebiel, D and Martinez-Peria, M S (2001), ‘Is the
crisis problem growing more severe?’, Economic Policy, Vol. 32
Catarineu-Rabell, E, Jackson, P and Tsomocos, D (2002) ‘Procyclicality and the new
Basel Accord – Banks’ Choice of Loan Rating System’, Bank of England, forthcoming
working paper
Central Bank Survey of Foreign Exchange and Derivatives Market Activity, April 1998:
Preliminary Global Data (BIS Press Release 19th Oct. 1998)
Crockett A (2001), ‘Market discipline and financial stability’, FSR, Issue No. 10, June 2001
Gunther, J W and Siems, T F (1995), ‘Who’s capitalising on derivatives’, Federal Reserve
Bank of Dallas Financial Industry Studies, July.
Hancock, D and Wilcox, J A (1997), ‘Bank capital, non-bank finance, and real estate
activity’, Journal of Housing Research, Vol 8
Hancock, D and Wilcox, J A (1998), ‘The “Credit Crunch” and the availability of credit to
small business’, Journal of Banking and Finance, forthcoming
Hoggarth G, Reis R and Saporta V (2001), ‘Costs of banking system instability: some
empirical evidence’, Bank of England, Working paper no. 144

5
Jackson P D, Furfine C, Groeneveld H, Hancock D, Jones D, Perraudin W, Radecki L
and Yoneyama M, (1999) ‘Capital Requirements and Bank Behaviour: the Impact of the
Basle Accord’, Basle Committee on Banking Supervision Working Papers, No.1, April
Jackson, P D (2000), ‘Unified Supervision: the UK experience’, The Financial Regulator,
December 2000
Jackson, P D and Lodge, D (2000), ’Fair Value Accounting, Capital Standards, Expected
loss provisioning and Financial Stability’, FSR, Vol. 8, June 2000
Jackson, P D, Perraudin W and Saporta V (2002), ‘Regulatory and “economic” solvency
standards for internationally active banks’, Journal of Banking and Finance, forthcoming
Jones, D (2000), ‘Emerging problems with the Basel Capital Accord: regulatory capital
arbitrage and related issues’, Journal of Banking & Finance, Vol. 24, January 2000
Peek, J and Rosengren, E S (1997), ‘The International Transmission of financial shocks: the
case of Japan’, American Economic Review, September
Peek, J and Rosengren, E S (1997), ‘Collateral Damage: Effects of the Japanese Real Estate
Collapse on Credit Availability and Real Activity in the United States’, Working Paper,
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, August
Persaud, A (2000), ‘Sending the Herd off the Cliff Edge: The disturbing interaction between
herding and market-sensitive risk management practices’, Journal of Risk Finance, Vol 2
Rule D (2001), ‘The credit derivatives market: its development and possible implications for
financial stability’, FSR, Issue No. 10, June 2001
Rule D (2001), ‘Risk transfer between banks, insurance companies and capital markets: an
overview’, FSR, Issue No. 11, December 2001
Thornton H (1802), ‘An Enquiry into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit of Great
Britain’

