Investing in capital markets
Speech given by
Chris Salmon, Executive Director, Markets, Bank of England

At the Association of Corporate Treasurers Corporate Funding Conference, London
28 October 2015

With thanks in particular to David Elliott as well as Ronnie Driver, Andrew Harley, Tom Henderson
and Tim Taylor for their input into these remarks.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

It is a pleasure to be here today at this ACT conference on Corporate Funding.

The theme of my remarks is investing in capital markets.

The corporate funding landscape that has emerged from the rubble of the financial crisis is very different to
that which preceded it. Capital markets are a much more important financing source for many firms. This
change is creating new opportunities and should support the resilience of corporate funding.

But, it also suggests new requirements for corporate treasurers. This includes the need to invest time in
understanding the drivers of a now more diverse set of financing options, so that you can have effective
plans for what remains an uncertain world. And it strengthens the case for investing energy to influence the
on-going reform programme to enhance the infrastructure of those markets.

So, after describing some of the key trends in corporate funding since the crisis, I will offer some thoughts on
each of these two areas, using examples to illuminate the broader point I am making. I will focus on possible
factors affecting the future supply of bond financing, given this remains the second most important source of
debt finance after bank credit. And, I will focus on two specific reforms to capital market infrastructure –
benchmark rate reform and standards and codes guiding foreign exchange market activity – which the Bank
is involved in and which will directly affect a number of corporates.

Changes in the corporate funding landscape
Bank lending to corporates has fallen since the crisis

The most notable change in funding patterns since the crisis has been the reduction in bank lending
(Chart 1). Between 2000 and 2007, average net lending by banks to UK non-financial corporates was
£38 billion per year. Since 2009, net lending has been minus £17 billion per year.

Initially, much of the reduction in borrowing from banks was reflected in falling corporate leverage. Indeed,
non-financial UK corporates were significant net issuers of equity in particular in 2009. But it has also been
associated with increased usage of other sources of debt. And different firms have turned to different
markets for non-bank financing.

Public and private bond issuance has increased

Large firms have increased bond issuance, particularly in international bond markets. Annual net issuance by
UK private non-financial corporates averaged £13 billion between 2000 and 2007. Since 2009 it has
averaged £30 billion.
2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2

And the stock of outstanding bonds issued by UK private non-financial corporates has increased from around
£140 billion in 2007 to over £400 billion today. Much of this issuance has been in euro and dollar, to take
advantage of the larger markets these currencies offer – and has so involved greater use of the foreign
exchange markets by corporates.

UK corporates have not been alone in increasing bond issuance: over the same period, the global private
non-financial corporate bond market has nearly tripled to £6.6 trillion.

It is not just total issuance that has increased. Bond market access has become available for a larger
number of firms (Chart 2). Between 2000 and 2007, there were on average six first-time UK non-financial
corporate bond issuers per year. Since 2009, there have been twenty-six per year. 2014 saw a record
thirty-six first-time issuers coming to market.

Large and medium-sized European firms have also made greater use of private placement markets. This has
included both the well-established US private placement and German Schuldschein markets, but also the
growth of new markets such as the French Euro Private Placement market.

Moreover, while data on private bond issuers are limited, it appears that the size barrier to corporate bond
issuance is now lower. Bank staff estimates suggest that the size of the median corporate bond issuer has
fallen by half since the crisis.

1

Other sources of market-based finance are growing

But there have also been interesting innovations in the funding markets for mid-sized and smaller companies
– those firms to which the bond markets remain out of reach.

Several asset managers have raised billions to lend directly to medium-sized European companies.

And smaller firms have started to benefit from the growth of alternative financing sources such as
peer-to-peer lending, invoice trading and equity crowd-funding (Chart 3). Alternative financing of this sort
remains small. Only 1% of SMEs currently use alternative financing, and estimates suggest that it makes up
less than 1% of the stock of SMEs’ outstanding bank loans. But it is growing rapidly from its small base,
having increased ten-fold since 2012.
SMEs have also been increasing their usage of a much more traditional funding source – supply chain
finance, such as invoice discounting.

1

Specifically, the median UK corporate issuer since 2009 was half the size, measured by annual turnover in real terms, than in the
period between 2000 and 2007.
3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

3

The picture will not look the same for every firm. Some have had it easier than others. But one conclusion is
clear – there has been a material shift from a reliance on bank funding to a broader range of financing
sources.

Key drivers of recent developments
This move has had three key drivers.

First, the experience of the crisis gave banks and their regulators a better understanding of the risks posed
by excessive leverage. This led to retrenchment by banks – a reduced supply of credit through the
traditional banking channel. This in turn prompted corporates to diversify their funding strategies as the risks
of reliance on one funding source were highlighted, increasing their demand for non-bank finance.

Second, this diversification has been supported by structural change flowing from several sources. For
example, technological innovation has facilitated new forms of intermediation such as peer-to-peer lending.
And the official sector has played a role, for example by encouraging direct non-bank lending through the UK
Government’s Business Finance Partnership.

Third, stimulative monetary policy by central banks has contributed to a decline in long-term government
bond yields, encouraging investors to seek yield elsewhere, including in the corporate bond market.

How might these three factors evolve in coming years?

On the last of the three, I am afraid I may disappoint you, since it is not my job to talk about the outlook for
monetary policy. That will depend as always on the outlook for the economy. Instead in the next section I
will consider what impact future changes in monetary policy might have on corporate financing conditions.

I can more freely make predictions about structural change, which will of course continue apace.
Technology will be used in new ways to overcome information barriers. Crowd-funding and peer-to-peer
lending platforms look set to continue growing. Initiatives to develop a pan-European private placement
market could fuel further growth in that market. And the liberalisation of key emerging market economies
may provide new markets for corporate debt.
But the first of the three factors – retrenchment by banks – appears to be easing. In every quarter from 2009
Q1 to 2014 Q2, we saw negative net lending by banks to non-financial corporates. But this year bank net
lending has turned positive.

4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

4

Our contacts tell us that banks are increasingly competing with bond markets to fund the best credits. Most
large firms now face little difficulty in raising the cash that they need from banks. Some smaller companies
are still finding it difficult to get the loans that they want. But even for small firms, conditions have improved
over the last year, and are expected to improve further. In the Bank’s Credit Conditions Survey, UK lenders
reported that the availability of credit to small businesses increased in the most recent two quarters, with a
further rise expected in Q4. The Federation of Small Businesses also reported an improvement in credit
conditions facing small firms. Increased competition, including by challenger banks, seems to have helped
here.

But while retrenchment may be easing, and banks’ own funding situation normalising, we do not expect it to
reverse. There looks to have been a permanent shift towards market-based finance. Estimates suggest that
bank lending made up two-thirds of the aggregate stock of UK non-financial corporations’ debt in 2007. Now
it makes up only half (Chart 4). A similar shift looks to have occurred in the US and Europe too, albeit from
quite different starting points.

There are two key implications of this shift that I wish to explore in the remainder of my remarks.

First, the change in the balance of financing by corporates means that the typical treasurer needs to keep in
mind a different set of risks when planning for tomorrow. Second, as corporates become more reliant on
market-based finance they have an even greater stake in the effectiveness of the infrastructure supporting
relevant capital markets and a greater collective responsibility to engage in its evolution.

A different set of risks
Having a diverse set of funding sources for corporates supports financial stability. It weakens what can be a
contagious link between the banking sector and the real economy. And it reduces the probability that stress
in one market, or among one group of investors, makes funding unavailable for a large number of borrowers.
Indeed, one of the Financial Policy Committee’s medium-term priorities is to ensure diverse and resilient
market-based finance.

But while diversification is undoubtedly good this is not a free lunch: bond markets, too, can be fickle.
Issuers have to ensure that they understand the risks, as well as the benefits, of increased usage of
market-based finance – not least those new issuers that have only experienced exceptionally supportive
conditions. Let me illustrate this by reference to three factors.

5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

5

First, the conjuncture may not always be as supportive as it has been in recent years – monetary policy will
not be this loose forever. In most recent monetary policy tightening cycles in the UK, US and euro area,
corporate bond spreads rose in the run-up to the first rate rise (Chart 5). If history repeats itself, then we
might expect to see conditions in some credit markets become less accommodative as we approach ‘lift off’.
Indeed, our contacts attribute some of the rise in spreads during 2015 to expectations of monetary policy
normalisation (particularly in the US).
That said, this monetary policy normalisation cycle will likely be different from the past – and hence
corporates need to recognise that transmission of this eventual change in policy through banks and capital
markets may be different.

One reason is that the MPC has said that when Bank Rate does increase, it is likely to rise more gradually
and to a lower level than in recent cycles. Another is that QE-induced portfolio rebalancing has compressed
term premia in a range of asset classes, including corporate debt. The reaction of term premia to signs of
monetary policy normalisation is yet to be tested. This is one reason that central bankers are going to some
lengths to establish clear communication strategies around their monetary policy decisions. Moreover, given
significant correlations amongst long-term bond yields in the UK, US and euro area, news about global
economic prospects will have an impact on our domestic bond markets. For example concerns about global
growth have contributed to significant increases in credit spreads since the summer. Similarly, foreign
monetary policy decisions can also be expected to have some impact. The UK’s many
internationally-focussed firms need to be particularly alert to the manifold factors that determine the yields
their investors demand.

Second, the underlying structural demand for corporate debt is likely to be affected by different factors to
bank credit, creating periods that are more or less supportive for primary market issuance. For example,
defined benefit pension fund demand for long-dated bonds has grown significantly in recent years as
schemes close and increasingly embrace liability-driven investment strategies aimed at hedging their
long-term liabilities. By contrast, demand from the insurance sector may be changing in response to the
introduction of new European regulation, and the pension freedoms announced in the April 2014 budget
have reduced demand for annuities. The shifts in the demand of different investors will have implications for
your debt strategies.

Third, and finally, as Deputy Governor Minouche Shafik discussed yesterday, the growth in primary market
issuance has coincided with a period when liquidity in secondary markets seems to have become more
fragile.

2

2

“Dealing with Change”, speech by Minouche Shafik at the AQR Institute of Asset Management, London Business School, 27 October
2015.
6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

6

Given Minouche’s recent speech I will cover the issue only briefly. A combination of factors has contributed
to changes in the characteristics of liquidity in fixed income markets:


Post-crisis regulatory reform has strengthened the core of the financial system: the dealers who
underwrite debt issues and make markets. But these regulations have also increased the explicit
costs of market-making – to bring them in line with the underlying risks involved.



The experience of the financial crisis has given banks greater awareness of the risks of extending
their balance sheets.



Market-making practices have evolved to make more efficient use of inventory.



And innovation in electronic trading has added to the data available for price discovery.

Several episodes over the past year or so have demonstrated the fragility of liquidity. Perhaps the most
th

dramatic occurred on the 15 of October 2014 in the US Treasury market – usually the most liquid fixed
income market in the world – when yields fell 29 basis points in just over an hour following the publication of
not that surprising retail sales data. And on a number of occasions this year and last, our contacts have
linked higher-than-usual volatility in corporate bond markets with reduced liquidity.

The risk is that this volatility could make it more difficult for corporates to issue new debt. Indeed, several
times this year we have seen primary market issuance drop sharply in response to secondary market
volatility.

In our view the regulatory reforms now in place should support the resilience of market-based finance though
time. It is worth noting that corporates who really needed funding have generally been able to get it even in
the most volatile periods in bond markets this year. And the recent pauses in issuance have lasted days or
weeks rather than months – in contrast to the capital market shut-downs at times in 2008, 2009 and 2012.
But the fact remains that the new market structure may be one in which seemingly benign conditions can
change fast – in primary markets as well as secondary.

Higher rates, wider spreads, unforeseen shifts in demand and frequent bouts of volatility would not make for
attractive – or predictable – issuance conditions. So let me clarify: my point is not capital market finance is
intrinsically more prone to shocks than bank credit. Indeed the financial system is highly interlinked and
separate elements of it will often be responding to common underlying shocks. But those shocks may
manifest themselves different ways across the system. The more treasurers are cognisant of that, and
invest in understanding how different shocks could affect the financing opportunities available to them, the
better placed you will be to seize the opportunities that will lie ahead.

7

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

7

Evolution of market infrastructure
My second theme is the importance of investing in the infrastructure that underlies market-based financing.

As the Governor set out in his Mansion House speech, financial markets only contribute to prosperity if they
are resilient, fair and effective and maintain a social license. But as you all well know, core financial
markets manifestly failed to meet these standards in recent years. The underlying cause was that the key
stakeholders in financial markets – authorities, intermediaries, and end-users – underinvested in the
infrastructure supporting those markets.

The Bank is involved in a number of work-streams to correct these failings. But we will only succeed in this
task by working cooperatively with market participants. So I want to highlight two areas that the Bank is
actively working on and where corporate sector engagement will be important in coming years.

The first is benchmark reform in sterling fixed-income markets. In response to the Libor and FX benchmarks
scandals, the governance and the calculation of key benchmarks has or is in the process of being enhanced.
But we still face the challenge that Libor remains too prevalent. While data are not perfect, around
£250 billion of corporate loans reference sterling Libor and it is the key interest rate in sterling derivatives
3

markets, referenced by contracts with a notional value of approximately £25 trillion .

Yet in many of these contracts, users are looking to hedge the general level of interest rates, for which a
near-risk free rate would be a more appropriate reference rate than Libor, which contains a bank credit risk
component.

Recognising this, for around a year now the Bank has been working to develop and promote an alternative
near risk-free reference rate. The aim of this work is to transition a significant portion of new derivatives
contracts to the alternative reference rate, moving to a world where Libor is used when it is appropriate to
account for bank credit risk, but not otherwise.

To succeed in this task we will need to overcome a number of substantial coordination challenges, including
reaching consensus on the identity of the new risk-free benchmark and how any transition should be
managed. To overcome these problems, the Bank established a Working Group of sterling swap market
participants in March this year. The working group has made good progress and I expect that a concrete
timetable for making a reality of this change should become clear during the course of next year.

3

Source: DTCC. Including contracts reported to other trade repositories would likely result in a somewhat higher figure.
8

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

8

As users of derivatives, corporates will be affected by and have a potentially important role in actively
supporting the eventual transition that will result from this work. And in any event, you will have to decide
whether and how to adapt your own use of reference rates once the transition is underway. For that reason it
will be important to engage with the Bank and the Working Group in coming months as and when firmer
proposals emerge. The working group has already had initial discussions with the ACT but that dialogue will
need to intensify.

The FX scandal highlighted weaknesses in the construction of key FX benchmarks. But it also highlighted a
lack of harmonisation as well as inadequacies in the effectiveness of codes of conduct in guiding behaviour
in those markets here and overseas. Earlier this year, major central banks launched an initiative to develop
a new, improved, single code of conduct standards and principles to be applied across wholesale FX
markets globally. The aim is to replace the existing patchwork of national codes with a single code and to
develop mechanisms to increase adherence. The code will apply to all participants in global wholesale FX
markets, including buy-side, sell-side and infrastructure providers. That will include large corporates
accessing FX markets directly.

The work is being taken forward by central banks working with a group of market participants drawn from
across the globe and representing all different types of business, including the corporate sector. This will be
complemented by engagement with regional foreign exchange committees, including the Joint Standing
Committee in London which I chair. The ACT sits on this committee and that provides an avenue through
which the corporate sector can engage with the process. And it will be important to do so: the new global
code will set out good practices in relation to market practices that matter to corporates such as information
sharing and client order handling by the banks which undertake wholesale FX market transactions on their
behalf. And it will also create obligations on corporate users of those markets.

The intention is to publish the new Code in May 2017, with interim guidance provided next May.

Looking beyond these specific examples, the forthcoming Open Forum will focus on the role of financial
th

markets in society more broadly. This is an event that the Bank will be hosting on 11 November, bringing
together every type of stakeholder in financial markets to discuss the progress of reform so far, and a map
for the future. Colin Tyler of the ACT will be attending on behalf of corporate treasurers.

But that forum will be just one step in an ongoing process by which end-users should engage in the evolution
of market infrastructure. There will be further opportunities for corporates to contribute to the development of
initiatives to support the development of effective markets – including those such as the Capital Markets
Union and the work of the new FICC Markets Standard Board that I have not discussed today. On a
continuing basis, therefore, we will be calling on all end-users to participate in the effort to improve the
effectiveness of markets and to help them maintain a social license.

9

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

9

I should summarise before I use up all your time and energy. The change in financing patterns since the
financial crisis is welcome; and is consistent with the development of more diverse and resilient
market-based finance, an FPC objective. But the changes we have seen require corporates to invest: in
understanding the determinants of new funding sources and in ensuring that the infrastructure supporting
these markets is robust and works in their interests as end users of these markets.

Thank you.

10

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

10

Charts
Chart 1: UK PNFCs’ quarterly net external
finance raised

£ billion
40
30
20

Thousands

Chart 2: Estimate of the number of UK PNFCs
issuing bonds

Number of UK PNFCs issuing bonds Number of firms
120
Of which, first-time issuers
100
80

10

60
0

40

Loans

-10

Equities
Bonds
Commercial paper

2001

20

-20

2006

0

-30

1992 1995 1998 2001 2004 2007 2010 2013

2011

Sources: Dealogic and Bank calculations.

Sources: Bank of England and ONS.
Finance raised by PNFCs from monetary financial
institutions and capital markets. Includes sterling and
foreign currency issuance. Bonds includes stand alone
and programme bonds. Non seasonally adjusted.

Chart 3: Gross flows of alternative finance
£ billion
3

Other
Equity crowdfunding

Invoice trading

2.5

P2P consumer lending
2

P2P business lending

No breakdown available

1.5

1
0.5
0
2012

2013

2014

2015

Sources: NESTA for 2012-2014, AltFi Liberum Volume
Index UK for 2015 (data to 22 October, annualised).

11

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

11

Chart 4: UK PNFCs’ stock of external debt
£ billion
900

80%

800

70%

700

60%

600

Asset-based finance

Lending by insurance
companies and
pension funds
Public bonds

50%

500

40%

400

30%

300
200

20%

100

10%

0

Bank lending

Share of bank lending
(RHS)

0%
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

Sources: Bank of England, ONS, Asset Based Finance Association and Bank calculations.

Chart 5: IG corporate bond spreads around the start of recent monetary policy tightening cycles
UK 2003
US 2004

UK 2006
Euro area 2005

Basis points relative to
start of tightening
20
15

Start of
tightening

10
5
0
-5
-10
-15

-20
-60

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10
0
10
Working days

20

30

40

50

60

Sources: Bank of America Merrill Lynch and Bank calculations.

12

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

12

