“Investors: speak now or forever hold your peace”
Speech given by
Robert Jenkins, Member of the Financial Policy Committee, Bank of England

At the CFA UK’s Annual Chairman’s Dinner, London
9 October 2012

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Mr. Chairman, distinguished guests, members of the UK Society, fellow Fellows: good evening. Thank you
for the opportunity to speak to you tonight.

As Richard indicated [Richard Rothwell, Society Chair], I have been both banker and fund manager. I am
now a regulator and teacher. I teach investment management at London Business School and I am an
external member of the Financial Policy Committee at the Bank of England. The “FPC” is the focal point in
the UK for something called macro-prudential policy. Our objective is to identify and mitigate threats to the
financial system. At the moment our priority is to protect the banks from the financial system – and the
financial system from the banks. But the end game is financial stability. And this is where we need your help
– and where you can make a difference.

That a regulator should seek your support may strike you as rich. Since the advent of the troubles the
investment community has been both harangued and harried by the authorities. Indeed, the first reaction of
Brussels to a banking crisis was to launch a Directive aimed at private equity and hedge funds. Never mind
that neither caused the collapse. Like a bar room brawl, some legislators lashed out at the fellow in the room
they disliked the most rather than strike the one who had actually tagged them. Ever since, waves of rules,
regulations, and consultations have washed over the financial sector carrying you along in their wake. It
sometimes seems that neither the public nor its representatives differentiate between investment
management and investment banking.

We are all investment bankers now

Why? Well, one reason is ignorance. The niceties of the “buy-side” versus “sell-side” are lost on the layman.
A second surrounds issues of stewardship. But at the end of the day you are guilty by association. You are
members of the financial sector and the financial sector has wrought much damage. Bankers, money
managers, and yes financial regulators as well – in the eyes of the public we are all investment bankers now.

How might you correct such mistaken identity? Well, you need to speak up and you need to stand out. As it
happens the podium is vacant and the arena is waiting. We are currently engaged in the regulatory reform
debate of a lifetime. The rulebook that results will frame the financial system for decades to come. Should
investment banking be separated from commercial banking? Are banks too highly leveraged? Will Basel III
succeed where Basel II failed? Too big to fail; too big to save; and too big to manage: these are key
questions of our time.

Now some of you will say that these are matters of banking reform. True. No doubt that is why neither you
nor your trade associations have gone out of the way to jump into the ring. Yet fundamentally these are
problems and proposals whose objective is the restoration and preservation of global financial stability. And

2

All speeches are available online at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2

no other sector of finance has a greater stake in stability than the investment profession. It is in your interest
that banking reform succeeds. You and your clients will suffer yet again if we fail.

Where are the investors?

To date this titanic tussle has been left largely to the formidably funded banking lobby in one corner and the
authorities in the other. Academics have weighed in with truth and light – but although their intellectual
capital is great their political influence is not. So you are the missing piece. What stakeholder group other
than the investment management industry has the combination of financial expertise, credibility and clout
sufficient to counterbalance the banks and so better shape the outcome of the debate? None. Alas, no
stakeholder group has been more silent.

Yes, you have taken a stand on some issues. I shall not forget the courage with which the CFA stood up to
be counted in 2009 on the question of fair value accounting. And the IMA [Investment Management
Association of the UK] has been active in the consultation process and vocal on Vickers. A number of
industry leaders have rallied round audit reform. More recently, a US hedge fund took a public stand in
favour of a more highly capitalized banking sector. This is all encouraging. But the fact that the latter made
front page news speaks to how unusual it is to hear from the investment community on issues of banking
reform.

Where to focus?

So where to start? May I suggest that you give priority to the issue of leverage and its mirror image – bank
equity capital. Why? Needless to say, we are coping with the aftermath of the biggest credit bubble in
history. Now bubbles are not new. They are always the same and always a bit different. In each instance one
finds a heavy dose of greed, stupidity and leverage. What distinguishes our recent trauma from other such
episodes is the extent and degree of leverage. Ladies and gentlemen: we will not abolish greed and we
cannot outlaw stupidity. But we can and must limit leverage.

Betting the banks on Basel

So what has been done to date? How have policy makers in Basel addressed this key issue? Well, the good
news is that the new rules will limit leverage in banks. The bad news is they will do so at 33 times.
Thirty-three times leveraged! It’s a hedge fund manager’s dream – or nightmare. (I believe that the average
hedge fund operates at less than 3 times – but of course, they don’t benefit from a taxpayer backstop.)

Now I don’t know about you. But given that the balance sheets of many banking behemoths exceed the GDP
of their host countries I think that gearing of thirty-three times is sailing a bit too close to the wind. By what
3

All speeches are available online at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

3

percent would today’s banking Brahmans have to get it wrong to bring down the system and your clients
along with it? Not much. Not worried? Perhaps you believe bank management to be infallible. Perhaps you
have complete faith in their risk management systems. Or perhaps you are confident that the regulatory
establishment will spot the next bubble and prick it with precision – all in the nick of time. No? Not entirely?
Then why on earth would you want such a highly leveraged system? Why would you not want a better
capitalized banking sector? What is the downside? The upside for financial stability is clear.

Ladies and gentlemen, I could happily go into more detail. I have done so in other published pieces. I am
hardly alone in my concerns. Suffice it here to say that the old financial structure has crumbled and a new
edifice is rising. But its foundation is flawed, the walls are thin and the beams are brittle. You did not design
it. You are not building it. But you and your clients will have to live in it. So please check the plans and the
motivations of those influential in its fabrication. The bad news is that the delivery date is seven years off.
The good news: there is still time for you to weigh in and strengthen the structure. Begin with the foundation.
The foundation is capital. And on this you are uniquely qualified to opine. Please, please do so.

4

All speeches are available online at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

4

