Lessons on unconventional monetary policy from the United
Kingdom
Speech given by
Charles Bean, Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy, Bank of England

US Monetary Policy Forum, New York
25 February 2011

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

Dealing with the consequences of the Great Financial Crisis of 2008 has led central banks on both sides of
the Atlantic into uncharted waters. Although the variety of special facilities introduced by the Bank of
England pales by comparison with the Federal Reserve, reflecting the greater diversity of non-bank financial
intermediaries on this side of the pond, we too have needed to innovate. Those innovations fall into three
broad buckets: enhanced liquidity support; actions to address dysfunctional markets; and large-scale asset
purchases to lower longer-term yields on a range of assets, so boosting nominal spending. As a by-product,
there was a marked expansion in the size of the Bank’s balance sheet (see Chart 1).

Pre-crisis, UK banks were expected to choose their own average level of central bank reserve holdings, and
then manage their liquidity needs either through the interbank market or through the use of overnight
standing facilities. We then provided the desired level of reserves, bearing interest at our policy rate (Bank
Rate), through regular repo operations of up to one-year tenor against high-quality collateral, mainly UK
government and other highly-rated official securities. In addition, we stood ready to offer emergency liquidity
assistance to solvent institutions suffering a shortage of liquidity by lending at a penalty rate against a wider
range of collateral.
As the crisis unfolded and the need for liquidity increased, so these arrangements required adaptation1. In
April 2008, we introduced a £185 billion Special Liquidity Scheme allowing banks to exchange illiquid
mortgage-backed securities for Treasury Bills for up to three years. We increased the volume of longer-term
funding and expanded the range of collateral accepted in our open market operations, particularly in the
wake of the collapse of Lehman Brothers. Around that time, we also introduced a Discount Window Facility
to provide short-term liquidity to stressed institutions against a wide range of collateral. Finally, after starting
large-scale asset purchases, we temporarily suspended reserves averaging as the amount of reserves in the
system increased well beyond the level the banks would otherwise have chosen.

Some of these changes will eventually be reversed. For instance, we expect to return in due course to a
regime in which the banks determine the level of reserves in the system. But we have learnt that a
somewhat more flexible sterling monetary framework is desirable, and accordingly will permit banks to
continue to borrow against a wider range of collateral, though at a higher cost and with larger haircuts than
for narrow collateral. Specifically, we have introduced long-term repos that allow banks to bid for funds
simultaneously against both narrow and wider collateral, with the auction design facilitating a greater
allocation against wider collateral as stress increases2. And, although the Special Liquidity Scheme ends in
2012, the Discount Window Facility will remain in place as a permanent feature.

1

For more details on the Bank’s liquidity support during the crisis, see Paul Fisher, “Managing Liquidity in the
System: The Bank’s Liquidity Insurance Operations”, speech to the Loan Market Association Syndicated
Loans Conference, London, 30 September 2010.
2
This builds on the work of Paul Klemperer (2010). “The Product-Mix Auction: a New Auction Design for
Differentiated Goods”, Journal of the European Economic Association, forthcoming.
2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publication/speeches

2

Turning to the second bucket, the Bank undertook a range of actions to improve the operation of temporarily
dysfunctional markets. We started purchasing high-quality commercial paper, with the aim of reducing the
liquidity premium which had become embedded in abnormally wide spreads. As the corporate bond market
had also become less liquid, with a sharp widening in spreads, we also made purchases, and subsequently
sales, of sterling investment-grade corporate bonds, with a view to improving the liquidity of that market
(which is, though, less important in the United Kingdom than in the United States). Finally, more recently we
have begun purchases of secured commercial paper (a form of asset-backed commercial paper secured
against short-term loans to a variety of borrowers), the aim being to improve the availability of finance for a
broader range of businesses.

The peak stock of our holdings of corporate assets reached £3 billion in May 2009. That is a relatively
modest sum compared to our purchases of government bonds. But it is measures of market liquidity, rather
than the amount bought, that are the appropriate indicators of effectiveness. And by these metrics, the
purchases seem to have been reasonably successful. Indeed, it is worth noting that a credible statement
that the central bank is willing to act as a backstop purchaser/seller may be enough to restore normal market
functioning, without requiring any purchases at all.

These purchases were undertaken using a specially created Asset Purchase Facility. To begin with, they
were financed by issuing Treasury Bills, though later purchases, including our large-scale acquisition of UK
government bonds, were financed by the issuance of reserves. This Asset Purchase Facility is necessarily
exposed to credit risk, although the restriction of purchases to high-quality assets makes that risk slight.
Even so, the Facility is indemnified against losses by the Treasury, so as to protect the Bank's balance
sheet.

The third bucket of unconventional measures relates to our large-scale purchases of long-term assets –
primarily UK government bonds – financed by the issuance of reserves, or so-called quantitative easing.
Before the crisis, and with policy rates averaging around 5%, we believed we had plenty of room to offset all
but the most severe adverse demand shocks. But the sharp rise in credit spreads during the crisis meant
Bank Rate had to fall sharply merely to maintain the pre-existing levels of effective interest rates facing
borrowers and lenders, let alone lowering them to stimulate aggregate demand. As a result, the Monetary
Policy Committee soon found itself with Bank Rate at 0.5%, close to its effective zero lower bound.

There are two main options at the zero lower bound if a central bank wants to inject further monetary
stimulus: committing to keep future policy rates low; and reducing the spreads of longer-term interest rates
over expected policy rates through asset purchases financed by the issuance of reserves. While a number
of central banks, including the Federal Reserve, the Bank of Canada and the Riksbank have provided some
explicit guidance on the likely path of future policy rates during the crisis, we have preferred to leave it to
market participants to draw their own judgements on the likely future distribution of Bank Rate from our
public communications, including especially our quarterly Inflation Report.
3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publication/speeches

3

But we have undertaken outright purchases of longer-dated assets, particularly medium and long-dated
government bonds, financed by the issuance of reserves. Between March 2009 and February 2010, through
the Asset Purchase Facility, the Bank acquired nearly £200 billion of such assets – that is, roughly 14% of
GDP or nearly a quarter of the outstanding stock of government debt.

The objective of this policy is to raise the prices not only of the purchased assets, but those of a whole range
of substitute assets, such as corporate equities and bonds, as sellers subsequently re-balance their
portfolios. That in turn boosts nominal spending through the usual wealth and cost of capital channels. In
principle, the associated expansion in commercial bank deposits, and in the banks’ increased holdings of
reserves, could, by virtue of the increased liquidity, also foster an improvement in the availability of bank
credit. But with the banks seeking to de-leverage and to build up their liquidity buffers, we expected this
channel to be weak. And that is borne out in the behaviour of the ratio of the monetary liabilities of the
banking system (broad money) to the monetary base, which fell sharply (see Chart 2).

Given the difficulty in identifying the counterfactual, the most persuasive evidence that large-scale asset
purchases have been effective comes from event studies looking at movements in asset prices around the
time of announcements of asset purchases. A recent study3 for the United Kingdom carried out at the Bank
found that the total impact on gilt yields was to lower them by an average of about 100 basis points (see
Chart 3). As some of the purchase announcements may have been anticipated, that should provide a lower
bound on their impact. Corporate bond yields also fell, with investment-grade bonds declining 70 basis
points and non-investment grade bonds falling 150 basis points. Similar studies for the United States find
broadly similar responses once allowance is made for the different sizes of the asset-purchase programmes
and economies.

Of course, these studies do not tell us about the ultimate impact on spending, activity and inflation. Annual
nominal GDP growth averaged a little over 5% before the crisis, consistent with real growth at trend and
inflation at target. Nominal GDP fell sharply during the recession, but has since returned to pre-crisis growth
rates (Chart 4). By that standard, it looks like policy has been effective, though of course other factors
besides monetary policy have certainly also been at work. And while the overall rate of nominal demand
growth has been satisfactory, the split between inflation and activity has certainly not been everything we
would wish, with our target measure of consumer price inflation reaching 4% in January. As explained in our
latest Inflation Report, we believe this primarily reflects the transitory impact of the pass-through from the
depreciation of sterling during 2007-8, the rapid increase in energy and other commodity prices associated
with strong growth in the emerging economies, and an increase in the rate of value added tax.

3

Michael Joyce, Ana Lasaosa, Ibrahim Stevens and Matthew Tong (2010). “The Financial Market Impact of
Quantitative Easing,” Bank of England Working Paper No.393.
4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publication/speeches

4

Should asset purchases also be part of the toolkit in normal times? While I think the evidence from both
sides of the Atlantic supports the view that they are an effective monetary policy tool, there are three
practical reasons why it may be preferable to rely on a short interest rate as the primary instrument once
normality returns.

First, while the evidence that asset purchases have an effect on asset prices is compelling, there is a wealth
of evidence regarding the monetary transmission mechanism from movements in short-term policy rates.
Moreover, central banks have considerable experience in operating policy through short interest rates.
Given that the impact of changes in a short-term policy rate is both more certain and better understood, it
makes more sense to put the most weight on that instrument rather than asset purchases.

Second, the efficacy of a given quantum of asset purchases may well be lower in normal times. During a
financial crisis, when credit is hard to come by, arbitrageurs may find it difficult to find the wherewithal to
correct any excessive compression of the spread between government bond yields and expected policy
rates or else they may be reluctant to do so. During normal times, though, such credit will be easier to get
and arbitrage may attenuate the effectiveness of asset purchases.

Third, while purchases of government debt may be a necessary resort at the zero lower bound, regular
purchases during normal times may give rise to the suspicion that the central bank is doing so at the behest
of government in order to lower the cost of budgetary finance, rather than for monetary policy purposes.
Aside from giving rise to doubts about the central bank’s independence, it could also lead to higher inflation
expectations and long-term nominal interest rates.

For these three reasons, then, I think central banks should continue to rely on a short-term interest rate as
their main policy instrument once normality returns. Asset purchases aimed at flattening the yield curve are,
in my view, best kept in a locker marked For Emergency Use Only.

5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publication/speeches

5

