Liquidity matters
Speech given by
Dame Clara Furse, External Member of the Financial Policy Committee, Bank of England;
Non-Executive Director of Nomura Holdings Inc; Vodafone Group Plc; Amadeus IT
Holdings SA; and lead independent Director at the UK’s Department of Work and
Pensions.

To regional business contacts, Birmingham
11 February 2015

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Introduction
It’s a pleasure to speak to you today in my capacity as an independent member of the Bank of England’s
Financial Policy Committee (FPC). The FPC was set up in the aftermath of the financial crisis, as the body
charged with identifying and mitigating threats to the financial system as a whole. This is our primary
objective. We also have what I believe is an important secondary objective – to support the government’s
economic policy, including its objectives for growth and employment. We refer to this as ‘macroprudential’
regulation, as distinct from ‘microprudential’ regulation with its focus on the safety and soundness of
individual financial firms. I would stress here that this speech reflects my own views as an independent FPC
member, not necessarily those of the Committee as a whole. And while one of my other roles is as an
independent non-executive director of Nomura Holdings, I am not speaking here in that capacity.
I suspect we all appreciate the value of financial stability today. One reason is that the financial sector is a
major part of the economy in its own right – for example, here in Birmingham, some 1,900 financial services
firms employ over 20,000 people. But more important, the financial system provides key services to every
other part of the economy: it intermediates between savers and borrowers, allows individuals and firms to
manage their risks, and should ensure that capital is allocated to where it can be most productive. Any of you
who require financing for domestic or international expansion projects, take out insurance against business
risks, hedge currency or commodity risk, or simply make payments electronically, will know that you need a
resilient and effective financial system.
Put simply: a stable financial system is one in which the real economy has continual access to the financial
services it needs. Today I want to talk about some changes to their provision, and the risks they may carry
for financial stability. In particular, I will focus on the growing importance of market based finance and the
nature of change to the resilience of liquidity provision in key capital markets.
The provision of financial services has been undergoing significant change for some time now, with
the financial crisis providing an important catalyst to a major shift to a new capital framework. Banking
business models are adjusting to a new world, and households and corporates are exploring new channels
for saving and borrowing.
For example, corporate bond issuance has more than quadrupled in the past decade. In part, this may be
because many corporates were stung by the experience of tightening credit conditions as banks came under
strain during the financial crisis – the so-called ‘credit crunch’ , which underlined their overwhelming reliance
on bank credit.

2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2

But Europe remains over reliant on bank finance…
This represents only a tentative shift towards capital markets. In Europe, we remain over-reliant on bank
finance. The numbers are stark; bank lending still accounts for three-quarters of corporate credit (albeit down
from 85% in 2008) compared to just 20% in the US.1 This illustrates the less-developed state of European
capital markets.
In Europe, assets are concentrated in the banking sector, which accounts for over 300% of GDP, compared
to around 70% in the US.2 The corollary is that savings held in other investment vehicles, such as mutual
funds and pension funds, are relatively small – at around 50% and 35% of US equivalents, respectively.
There is a corresponding lack of depth in European capital markets, with initial public offerings of equity at
around half the level in the US, while secondary market trading for European equity and corporate bond
markets represent around 70% and 60% of US counterparts, respectively. I should point out, however, that
within this broader European picture, the UK stands out at some distance ahead of our European
neighbours; closer to the US model as a result of our highly developed equity market.
The overall dominance of the banking sector is underlined by the balance sheets of non-financial companies,
with bank loans accounting for around 30% of these companies’ liability structures in Europe; this compares
to around 10% in the United States.3 In fact, corporate loan financing in Europe outstrips bond financing by
around eight times; in the US this sits at a roughly equal balance (Chart 1).
The desired balance between bank and market-based finance is open to debate. But if nothing else, the
recent experience of the financial crisis suggests that the cost of excessive reliance on the banking system
can be debilitating – during the crisis, Europe suffered a long and severe contraction in credit supply as the
health of the banking system became impaired.

1

‘Driving growth: making the case for bigger and better capital markets in Europe’, New Financial, October 2014
based on ECB, Eurostat, Federal Reserve, US Bureau of Economic Analysis data and Bank calculations
based on OECD National Accounts Statistics

2
3

3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

3

Chart 1: Bank versus bond financing

Source: Bruegel based on S&P calculations from central banks, Eurostat, IMF and Bank
for International Settlements data

So it seems sensible to secure the benefits that capital markets and market-based finance can clearly
offer our companies; namely, funding alternatives and risk management options against a more diverse
group of counterparties. Indeed, pushing savings from a conservative bank deposit to real investment is
critical to ensuring that risk-taking can produce future economic growth and prosperity. And without
sustainable growth it is hard to imagine a truly safe and stable financial system.
A bank-based system is also a debt-based system. But strong capital markets create more scope for equity
finance. And equity finance can confer financial stability benefits as it provides companies with far more
flexibility. Funding can be staged as the company grows and dividend payments can be adjusted in light of
corporate success and economic conditions, to name two advantages. Compared with long and painful debt
restructurings, rights issues are typically far more successful, leaving companies fit for the future. A
shareholder tends to buy into the company’s strategy and can develop a sense of ‘ownership’ which
subsequently supports the firm in a tangible and, hopefully, productive way.
Risks…
But market-based finance can also present systemic risk– an obvious example is the manner in which
financing mechanisms outside the banking system helped to propagate the risk from US sub-prime to
financial institutions internationally in 2007/8.
One of the Financial Policy Committee’s responsibilities is to identify and assess systemic risks to the UK
economy that may arise from across the global financial system – not just in the closely supervised banking

4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

4

system but also, potentially, in broader capital markets. However, the Committee also seeks to improve the
diversity and robustness of financing channels in the UK; this is to ensure stability in key financial services
that support economic growth. And this suggests a role for the FPC in reducing impediments to their
provision.
In the longer term, a more balanced UK financial system is desirable and should emerge. This greater
diversity of finance should make both the real economy and systemic sectors, such as the banking system,
more resilient to economic shocks.
The financial crisis has made central banks acutely aware of the challenges posed by an economy so reliant
on its banking system. Nearly seven years after the white heat of the crisis, extraordinary measures by
central banks continue. The development of market-based finance should also help central banks to step
back from ‘last resort’ measures and allow private markets to operate more widely and efficiently. Provided
that these markets are resilient, this will be a welcome transition.
The importance of banks in supporting market-based finance
The wind is blowing in this direction, as major banks review their business models and retrench – issuance of
high yield bonds has trebled in the past decade.4 The global asset management sector has also doubled in
size in the same period;5 supporting this trend with an increasing appetite for quality investment assets.
But as we transition to an economy more dependent on capital markets, their resilience to stress will matter
far more.
Crucial to this will be an understanding of the interaction and complementarity of market-based and
bank-based finance – and indeed the knowledge that capital markets can’t and won’t substitute for the
banks, which play a key role in facilitating efficient access to markets.
For example, securitisation – the process by which bank-originated credit claims are packaged into
marketable securities – can help to deliver credit by utilising banks’ loan origination capability while attracting
investors from outside the banking sector to fund and share the risks of this lending.
Tradable financial products are (also) fundamental to capital markets – whether shares listed on a stock
exchange, corporate bonds, exchange-traded funds, foreign exchange derivatives, or investment trusts, to
name a few. Potential issuers seeking a stock exchange listing value a marketplace in which investors can
make an initial investment and take a stake in their business; but these investors would be far less likely to

4
5

Based on Dealogic data
Based on measures compiled by Boston Consulting Group and TheCityUK
5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

5

do so without the presence of a liquid secondary market in which they could adjust their holdings as their
requirements and circumstances change.
In this way, liquid financial markets are a key element in a well-functioning financial system that facilitates
investment in the real economy and supports economic growth. These primary issuance and secondary
trading markets have developed over time, and have generally been facilitated by investment banks and
broker/dealers on behalf of their clients – both issuers and investors.
Recent reforms in the regulation of investment banks – including enhanced capital and liquidity standards –
have made the core of the system much safer. But one concern for me, in light of recent developments in
financial markets, is that reduced activity by investment banks in capital markets could be making some
markets more fragile, hindering their ability to provide essential services to companies and investors in a
resilient and cost-efficient way.
Resilient market liquidity is key to successful market-based finance
Market liquidity is the ease with which one asset can be traded for another. In financial markets, this relates
to the ability to transact in a security at a level close to the prevailing market price, and in a way that
promotes price discovery in line with fundamental factors, such as the outlook for future cash flows. It is
strengthened by the presence of a diverse range of market participants, high quality research and analysis,
open and cost-effective access to markets and transparency.
Improved market liquidity is therefore positive for the financial system; enabling the efficient allocation of
capital to economic opportunity– intermediating savers and borrowers and insuring against and dispersing
commercial and financial risk appropriately and cost-effectively.
But the quality and resilience of liquidity can be difficult to assess. A market may appear to be highly liquid
due to demand for assets driven by broader conditions in the financial system. ‘Funding liquidity’, the ease
with which banks and other financial intermediaries can raise funding, and ‘monetary liquidity’, the
counterpart to credit creation in the financial system, can interact to create a veneer of abundant liquidity. For
example, rising demand for assets created by a relaxation in funding and monetary conditions (in part from
low interest rates and quantitative easing) can undermine the price discovery process, leading to apparently
stable prices, an under-pricing of tail risk and insufficient compensation for liquidity risk.
The activities of investment banks play a central role in supporting capital markets
Investment banks have traditionally been key to the resilience of market liquidity through their trading
operations, especially their market making activity. Market makers facilitate trading for their clients in
secondary markets by standing ready to buy or sell securities at the so-called market price and making a
6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

6

margin on the spread – while seeking to manage the financial risk arising from these trades and the
securities they hold on their market-making books to facilitate them. This service provides a degree of
certainty that an investor will be able to trade a given security at a reasonably predictable price at short
notice.
Investment banks may be better placed than other market participants to provide such services. The client
relationships which they seek to maintain have provided an incentive to commit their own capital towards
this. As an example, investment banks generally provide liquidity to secondary markets after facilitating an
equity or bond issue for a corporate client. Their knowledge of the company and its business should also
assist in the proper pricing of a new security brought to market.
The importance of keeping primary markets open and active for corporates seeking to fund enterprise means
that secondary markets must work effectively. Investment banks have traditionally supported market liquidity
in times of stress, providing prices even during periods of great uncertainty and volatility; effectively acting as
a buffer and shock-absorber as investors adjust to unexpected news. Securities financing and ‘repo’
markets, essential to the management and hedging of these intermediation risks have been called ‘the
silently beating heart’ of the capital markets.6 But there are, of course, limits to the willingness of investment
banks to provide this service. Faced with an extreme shock, they have also withdrawn from markets in order
to contain their own risk – as was illustrated dramatically in the financial crisis.
But investment banks have withdrawn from such activities in recent years…
The severe trading losses that many suffered during the crisis also triggered a reassessment of their risk
profiles and business models. In 2008 alone, aggregate trading losses in the UK banking system were over
£40bn.7 The scale of these losses has been a major impetus for regulatory reform.
Since then, much has changed. Five years after the peak of the crisis, global investment banks had reduced
their trading inventories by nearly 25%. The figure for major UK banks is closer to 30%.8 Current inventory
levels are now at levels last seen in the early 2000s – and the relevant markets are now very much larger
and far more international, following the rapid globalisation and economic growth of the pre-crisis decade.
While much of this fall in inventory was driven by investment banks unwinding large structured credit books,
this has been extended and reinforced by regulatory reform. As we know, the post-crisis package of
prudential measures included multiple adjustments to capital requirements from levels that were far too low.
This has greatly increased the resilience of the core banking system. However it has also altered the
economic model for capital markets intermediation, and will have acted as an additional disincentive to such
activities, especially those related to low-margin market-making.
6
7
8

http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/data-chart-center/quarterly-refunding/Documents/Charge_2.pdf
Bank of England data
Bank of England, Financial Stability Report, December 2014 pp 13-14, 18
7

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

7

Proprietary trading has also largely disappeared from major investment banks’ American and European
operations – mainly as a result of regulation designed to protect bank depositors from the potential for
losses, in extremis, arising from the existence of these trading books. While regulatory reform was clearly
needed, the decline in proprietary trading also reduces the depth and diversity of capital markets
participation.
…contributing to a more fragile market liquidity environment
The decline in investment bank market-making has been a growing theme in recent years. It looks structural.
Some banks have responded by moving to more of an agent role in some markets, thereby reducing balance
sheet risk. Asset managers report an increased need to split larger transactions across dealers. As a
consequence the financial system has less capacity to absorb market shifts and periods of higher volatility
are more likely.
But despite these changes, some measures of liquidity risk premia appear compressed; the compensation
that investors require for bearing liquidity risk in some corporate bond markets has actually fallen to below its
long-term average (Chart 2). Fragile liquidity conditions in these markets render them vulnerable to sharp
correction.
Such risk may have crystallised to some extent in the summer 2014 'wobble' in high yield markets and then,
in mid-October, in the extreme volatility seen in the US Treasury market. Neither of these episodes can be
adequately explained by significant news triggers.

Chart 2: Deviations of estimated corporate bond liquidity risk premia from historical
averages(a)(b)(c)(d)

Sources: Bloomberg, BofA Merrill Lynch Global Research, Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) Implied liquidity premia are estimated using a Merton model as in Leland, H and Toft, K (1996), 'Optimal capital structure,
endogenous bankruptcy, and the term structure of credit spreads', Journal of Finance, Vol. 51, pages 987-1,019, to decompose
corporate bond spreads.
(b) Quarterly averages of deviations of implied liquidity risk premia from sample averages.
(c) Sample averages are from 1999 Q4 for € investment-grade and 1997 Q1 for £ investment-grade, US$ investment-grade
and US$ high-yield.

8

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

8

Few other market participants can support market liquidity in the same way as investment banks…
This suggests that we are on a path to a new market structure, with established investment banks acting
more like brokers, increasingly acting as agent rather than principal. Their clients – institutional investors,
pension funds and hedge funds – are increasingly being seen as the true providers of market liquidity. But
this is clearly not the same as an intermediation or market making role.
Theoretically, a liquid and efficient market for securities can exist without a market-making function.
Exchanges like the London Stock Exchange do this job, particularly when securities are numerous, fungible
and regularly traded. But while efforts are being made to move more financial instruments to various trading
platforms, intermediaries have a vital role to play – especially in markets for securities that are less amenable
to exchange trading, like corporate bonds or bespoke derivatives. These will each have distinct
characteristics, geared to the specific needs of the company at that point in time.
Central banks can and did act to backstop financial markets in the crisis in a ‘market maker of last resort’
role. But, while it is important for investors and issuers to have confidence that their funding channels will be
there when they need them, there can be moral hazard in an expectation that liquidity risk will be taken off
the table by central banks in circumstances that may compel them to intervene. The Bank was cognisant of
these issues in drawing up its published principles for any future ‘market maker of last resort’ intervention –
which make it clear that this would only happen under ‘exceptional’ circumstances.9
To conclude:
The shift to a greater use of market-based finance is desirable in Europe, given our overreliance on the
banking system for the provision of finance to the economy.
But as it develops we will need to ensure it is resilient and that it underpins the stability of finance to the
economy. That will depend on the resilience of liquidity in capital markets.
The post-crisis regulatory reform agenda has benefitted financial stability materially, by reducing the
probability and likely cost of financial crises. However, there is evidence that liquidity in some key markets
has become more fragile. And there may be unforeseen consequences for the intermediation and market
making functions performed by broker/dealers and investment banks that are a source of market liquidity –
and liquid markets are necessary to support a shift to resilient market-based finance.
In order to ensure that capital markets can contribute to the stability and prosperity of the economy, without
recourse to ‘last resort’ liquidity provision, it is imperative that more thought is given to how we promote
resilient capital markets during what could be a bumpy transition at a time of heightened geo-political risk. As
9

http://bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Documents/money/publications/redbook.pdf
9

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

9

I mentioned earlier, the FPC considers diverse and resilient sources of market-based finance to be a key
priority.
As the post-crisis reform agenda beds down, it will be important to take stock of the cumulative impact and
interaction of all the recent reforms, which may at times be attempting to reduce the same risks in a number
of different ways. The goal is to achieve the right calibration for a financial system that is able to work
towards a sound and strong economic future.

10

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

10

