Opening Remarks for Panel on the Macro-Economy and
Quantitative Easing
Speech given by
Tim Besley, Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England

At the London School of Economics
2 July 2009

I would like to thank Jake Horwood, Neil Meads and Paolo Surico for assistance in preparing these
remarks. I am also grateful for helpful comments from other colleagues. The views expressed are my
own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of England or other members of the Monetary
Policy Committee.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Recent monetary policy in the U.K. has been far from “business as usual”. In
response to the dramatic events following the collapse of Lehman brothers, the MPC
cut interest rates to 0.5% and initiated a program of asset purchases financed by the
creation central bank reserves, something which is popularly known as quantitative
easing, hereafter QE. The MPC has so far set a target for asset purchases of £125
billion which will have been completed in the next month or so. To date £99.1 billion
of assets have been purchased with £96.4bn being Gilts and £2.8bn being private
sector assets of which £1.95 billion is commercial paper and £0.78 billion is in
corporate bonds.1 Progress towards the MPC’s objective is given in Chart 1.

In my opening remarks for this session, I plan to discuss three main issues. First, it is
useful to review the motivation for QE. Second, I will tie this to a discussion of the
transmission mechanism of monetary policy and the role of financial frictions in
affecting this. This will allow me a brief reflection on the dominant mode of thinking
about that mechanism in academic and policy circles over the past decade or so.
Third, I will use this discussion to reflect on the future and the implications for a
return to more normal policy as the economy recovers.

So I begin with the motivation for QE as monetary policy. Here, I want to emphasise
that QE is the natural way to conduct monetary policy when nominal interest rates hit
their effective lower bound. Indeed, in many respects it is a natural extension of
standard open market operations that are used to implement Bank Rate.

Standard theories say that a Central Bank can stimulate the growth of nominal
demand by increasing base money which then increases broad money and ultimately
feeds into spending decisions by households and businesses. In the canonical
example, this policy is conducted by purchases of safe Treasury Bills so that the Bank
does not face concerns about managing default risk on the assets that it purchases.

Let me make one observation on this simple story that I will pick up later. The
stylized model of QE does not need to make any direct appeal to the role of financial
frictions in affecting its impact. However, you will be aware that many accounts of
1

Correct as of COB 25/6/2009

2

the way that the increased liquidity injected affects the real economy have emphasised
imperfect substitutability of assets – something which really only makes sense when
such frictions are present. This was the centre piece of the analysis of the
transmission mechanism by Brunner and Meltzler. But the economics 101 version of
QE could be told more simply via a real balance effect – seeing the impact through
increasing nominal wealth where the role of the financial sector (imperfect or
otherwise) could be kept firmly in the background.

There are two distinct objectives underpinning the QE strategy being pursued at the
present time.

The first corresponds to the standard argument for expansionary monetary policy that
corresponds to the stylized account given above. This aim of QE is to reverse the fall
in the growth rate of nominal GDP and to avoid the threat of a period of below target
inflation, or even deflation.

It is difficult to assess whether QE is working in this regard given the usual long and
variable lags in the transmission process. Moreover, it is extremely difficult to know
the counterfactual path of money growth and nominal GDP had the MPC not
introduced its program of asset purchases. Thus, we will not know for sure whether
QE has been directly effective in supporting nominal demand growth for some time
and a definitive assessment right now would certainly be premature.

The second purpose of asset purchases is to improve conditions in some private asset
markets, particularly improving market liquidity. Some have used the term Credit
Easing rather than Quantitative Easing to describe this. In part, this is because such
operations could arguably be just effective if they were financed by issuance of short
term securities such as Treasury Bills. There is some evidence that funding
conditions in corporate bond markets have improved and there is some new issuance.
Given difficulties with obtaining bank finance, directly placed debt is a potentially
more attractive source of finance for many businesses at present, assuming that they
are able to take advantage of such funding opportunities. But directly placed debt is
generally only viable for larger businesses.

3

Given the size of the QE program, it was inevitable that a program of QE would end
up focusing on Gilt purchases given the size of the market for Corporate Bonds and
Commercial Paper. Focusing on Gilt purchases in the middle of the yield curve is
partly an effort to try to inject money into the non-Bank sector to avoid the possibility
that such reserves would simply be hoarded in Bank accounts. In line with the
Brunner-Meltzler logic, we might also hope that reductions in Gilt yields will
encourage holding of relatively more illiquid assets.

So while QE is primarily intended to support the growth of nominal demand, there are
certainly potential benefits in easing financial frictions.

This brings me to my second topic.

Behind the recent experience lies the fact that monetary policy is now being
conducted in the context of ongoing difficulties in a number of financial markets.
This would be an issue even if policy were being conducted by raising and lowering
Bank Rate in the conventional way. If I look back over the entire three year period on
which I have been on the MPC, financial frictions (or lack thereof) have been
absolutely central to understanding monetary policy effectiveness. This is important
since the standard, and dominant, modelling approach to the transmission mechanism
puts very little weight on these.

Prior to August 2007, financial markets were buoyant with leverage growing and
balance sheets of Banks expanding. Risk premia became compressed as illustrated in
Chart 2. Arguably, this meant that small increases in Bank Rate were having
relatively little impact on real activity. Most real asset prices are influenced by longterm real interest rates which became unhinged from short-term rates, arguably set
more by global developments and financial flows. Frictions in financial markets
seemed to be minimal with ready access to credit on easy terms for many borrowers
whether in the corporate or household sector. This world was, as we now understand,
not sustainable. But it remains a real question how far movements in Bank Rate could
and should have been used to deal with these issues. Recognizing this, the current
debate has now rightly opened up on what other instruments make sense and what
institutional arrangements are needed to ensure that these are used appropriately.
4

These are important issues, but I do not propose to enter this debate today. However,
they are central to this conference.

Following the onset of the credit crunch, we have entered a world where frictions in
financial markets have re-asserted themselves with a vengeance. This is visible in the
well-known charts of a variety of spreads such as those illustrated in Chart 3.
Conceptually, these spreads comprise compensation for default risk and liquidity risk
as well as reflecting the market-power of lenders. It remains difficult to provide a
convincing decomposition of the spread into these components.

But spreads do not tell the full story. Unlike more standard markets, it is well-known
that the threat of default creates the possibility that many households and business are
unable to access credit at prevailing quoted rates. This is the much-studied problem
of credit rationing. It is extremely difficult to establish empirically whether rationing
is taking place and how severe it is. But it is worth remarking that there is important
action in credit quantities which is demonstrated in Chart 4.

As many MPC members have argued over the past year, financial frictions have had a
first-order impact on the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. We have taken
radical actions in part because of this extreme impairment of the financial system
which has made it more difficult for reductions in Bank Rate to have an effect on the
growth of nominal demand that they might have had in the past. However, the same
factors that inhibit the transmission of Bank Rate onto the real economy also affect
the transmission of QE.

So to summarise; during the upswing and the downswing over the past three years, it
is evident that an approach to the monetary transmission mechanism which paid no
attention to the role of financial frictions would be blind to what are arguably the most
significant macro-economic developments in the U.K. economy. However, it is fair
to say, that the dominant economic approach, which seemed to have served well for
more than a decade, paid little or no attention to these factors in the monetary
transmission mechanism.

5

However, it is easy to be critical. And there is no readily available and easily applied
off-the-shelf fix that could have been employed for thinking through these issues.
There are many interesting and important lines of thinking such as that which emerges
from research by Ben Bernanke and Mark Gertler on financial fragility or Nobu
Kiyotaki and John Moore on credit cycles. These give a precise and useful window
on some of the interlinkages between the real and financial sides of the economy.
However, such models do not explicitly model banking as an activity. Moreover, they
cannot easily be brought to the data or applied to monetary policy transmission.

So now to my third subject; the implications of this for the monetary policy
challenges that the MPC faces now and in the future. There is a fair amount of
understandable concern about the possibility that expansionary monetary policy will
have an impact on inflation in future. Implicit in this judgement is the view that, since
interest rates are so low and we are now using QE, then policy must be loose. But
two points must be borne in mind before accepting this conclusion.

First, there is the context in which we entered into this downturn. Among the unusual
features of the prelude to the recent crisis is the fact that we entered the downturn with
inflation expectations well-anchored around the 2% inflation target. Although there
had been upside inflationary shocks over the past three or so years, monetary policy
has kept inflation expectations broadly in line with the target, something which
remains more-or-less true at present. This starting point meant that nominal interest
rates were already low by recent historical standards so that the lower bound was
reached as the MPC attempted to make policy more accommodative in response to the
global downturn.

Second, the stance of policy must be assessed relative to the conditions in financial
markets which remain abnormally stressed. Any judgement about how
accommodative monetary policy is at any point in time cannot be made without
reference to this.

These arguments, in my view, undermine the knee-jerk reaction to QE and the
response that it will inevitably lead to a period of above target inflation in the medium
term.
6

That is not to say, however, that there is no medium term upside inflationary risk if
monetary policy stays too loose for too long. But to assess this, it is important to
think about how the monetary policy reaction function is determined. I say this since
one important aspect of the intellectual framework for analyzing that needs to be
maintained at centre stage is the idea that monetary policy is governed by a policy
reaction function which underpins the credibility of the inflation target.

The standard way of thinking about this is in terms of a so-called Taylor Rule in
which the nominal interest rate is determined as a function of inflation and the output
gap. Inflation expectations can then be formed with reference to this rule given the
current stance of policy. This is, of course, a stylized view. But it remains a useful
way of thinking. Nominal interest changes as a tool also provide a salient barometer
of the stance of policy that makes clear how a central bank views the balance of risk
which can be supplemented with additional more nuanced communication.

Policy strategies based on movements in nominal interest rates against a clearly
defined policy objective replaced a much less transparent and less successful policy
regime which included attempts to manage monetary aggregates.

It is interesting to look at where current policy is in relation to a standard Taylor type
rule. Chart 5 is useful in giving a sense of this. Whether we use the backward or
forward looking rule, these show that the nominal interest rate is currently beneath
that implied by a standard rule. However, once again this reflects that we would
expect the optimal rule to reflect prevailing conditions in financial markets. In other
words the rule needs to be time varying and reflect the shocks that hit the economy.

One challenge faced by the MPC is that the current monetary policy strategy where
the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates has been reached cannot easily be
mapped into a policy rule like that in Chart 5. For example, the assumed policy
multiplier from Bank Rate to inflation is uncertain at the lower bound. Further, there
are large uncertainties as to the relationship between asset purchases and inflation
based on historical data. Moreover, how communications around asset purchases are

7

interpreted is hard to gauge when, unlike nominal interest rates, there is a little
directly visible to households and businesses to gauge the current stance of policy.

All this suggests to me that the MPC will need at some point need to tighten policy
through a combination of raising nominal interest rates and “quantitative tightening”,
to make clear that upside risks to inflation can be headed off and to maintain a
credible policy reaction function to meet the target. The MPC will also have to be
aware of potential nonlinearities in the policy multiplier.

Just as with monetary policy conducted by adjusting Bank Rate, there is little point
now in trying to speculate about the quantitative nature of the trigger events in the
data that would lead to policy tightening. It will be the forward looking implications
of these data that are essential to any such decision. What matters is that inflation
expectations will continue to be formed understanding the MPC’s commitment to
maintaining the inflation target in the medium term.

The past year has been extremely challenging for policy. The degree of monetary
policy activism is unprecedented. In the months ahead, the challenge will hopefully
be to resume normality. It should be evident from my remarks that there will be a
need in future to pay greater attention to the role of financial frictions in the monetary
transmission mechanism. Finding ways of doing this in a way that is useful for policy
is a challenge for applied research. In my view, the temptation should be eschewed of
believing that a modest tweak in the standard model, such as creating a spread in the
lending/borrowing opportunities of businesses and households, should suffice.
Models that pay serious attention to quantities as well as prices seem essential.

My prejudice, given that my background is predominantly as a micro-economist, is
that we need to think in terms of a set of models that have strengths in illuminating
different facets of these issues. However, just how one aggregates insights from a
more eclectic approach into a judgement about policy is somewhat tricky.
Throughout my time on the MPC, we have used the Bank of England Quarterly
Model (BEQM) as the core modelling tool. But, contrary to some misconceptions
that I have heard, I can assure you that the richness of the debates that we have on the

8

MPC takes us far from a rigid adherence to the model’s findings. This has been
particularly true since we started on the path towards QE.

Inflation targeting has at times been viewed as excessively rigid, particular in view of
the shocks that we have faced in the recent past. But it has provided a framework
which has rather naturally permitted a move to QE once the need became apparent.
Moreover, concerns about medium term inflationary implications of QE are best dealt
with by making sure that this framework remains strong and the decision process
remains independent.

9

Chart 1: Asset Purchase Facility: Weekly Stock Holdings
£bns

120
Gilts

Commercial paper

Corporate Bonds
100
80
60
40
20

April

March

May

25

18

11

4

28

21

14

7

30

23

9
16

2

26

19

12

0
June

Source: Bank of England

Chart 2: UK Corporate Bond Spreads
Sterling investment grade

Sterling sub-investment grade

3500

800

3000

700
600

2500

500

2000

400
1500

300

1000

200

500

100
0

0

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

10

2007

2009

Chart 3: Interest Rate Spreads for Households and PNFCs
Percentage Points
6
5
PNFC High Loan Rate

4
3

Household 2-Year Fixed Rate (75% LTV)

2
PNFC Low Loan Rate
1
0
Household 2-Year Discounted Rate (75% LTV)
-1
1999
2000 2001
2002
Source: Bank of England

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Chart 4: Growth Rates in Quantities of Credit
% change oya
25

PNFCs M4L

20

Unsecured lending to Individuals
15

10

5

Secured lending to individuals
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

Source: Bank of England

11

2007

2008

0
2009

Chart 5: Interest Rate Implied by Simple Taylor Rule
Per Cent
8
7
Bank Rate (quarterly averages)
6
5
4
3
Backward Looking Taylor Rule
2
Forward looking Taylor Rule (a)

1
0

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Basic Taylor Rule Specification:

it = π t −1 + 0.5( y − y*) / y*) t −1 + 0.5(π − π *) t −1 + rt
Note: The equilibrium real interest rate (rt) is based on the index-linked gilt curve adjusted
upwards by 0.5pp to reflect differences between CPI and RPI inflation due to methods of price
aggregation. Potential output (y*) is estimated by a hp-filter of output (1970-2007) and
subsequently has been increased/decreased at half the growth rate of observed/forecast output.
Weightings of 0.5 on output and inflation gap measures follow Taylor (1993).
(a) Forward looking measure advances output gap by 4 quarters and the inflation gap term by 8
quarters.

12

