Macroprudential Policy for Insurers
Paper by
Vicky Saporta, Chair of the Executive Committee of the International Association of
Insurance Supervisors

Association of British Insurers Annual Conference 2016
22 November 2016

A version of this paper was given as a speech at the IIF Colloquium on International Insurance
Regulatory Issues, Basel, 22 September 2016. The author would like to thank David Humphry for his
help in writing the paper and Paolo Cadoni, David Murphy, Stephen Hogge, Matt Jones,
Catherine Lezon, John Maroney, Bernhard Mayr, Andreas Viljoen, Matthieu Vital, Sam Woods and
Mark Zelmer for comments. The views expressed in this paper do not necessarily represent the
views of the Bank of England, where Vicky Saporta is Executive Director, Prudential Policy.

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Introduction

1. Aspects of what we now term microprudential regulation of insurance have existed for well over
100 years in a number of countries. For example, New Hampshire established the first state agency
for the supervision of insurance in the United Stated in 1851. In the UK, the first Act of Parliament
on Life Assurance in the UK was enacted in 1870.

1

2. Microprudential insurance regulators have continually adapted their approaches as financial markets
and products have become more complex and understanding of risk improves. Risk-based
regulation is the latest development in this process of improvement. But even risk-based regulation
has now been around for about the last 25 years or so in some jurisdictions.
3. Turning to macroprudential regulation – the concept has been around since the 1970s, with central
bank financial stability reports becoming common from mid-1990s onwards. Statutory-based
macroprudential regulation, with explicit statutory objectives, policy tools and operational decision
making frameworks, however, has largely been a post-crisis development.
4. There is no question in my mind that microprudential regulation to protect companies’ safety and
soundness and to protect policyholders is the key foundation of all insurance prudential regulation.
And I know that this is not a controversial statement. What is more controversial is whether
macroprudential regulation has a role to play in insurance regulation.
5. In what follows, I will explain why I believe that microprudential regulation – the key plank of
prudential regulation in insurance - needs to be complemented with macroprudential overlays to be
comprehensive and fully effective.

Macroprudential Regulation

6. Part of the challenge of understanding the implications of macroprudential regulation is setting out
what we mean by it.
2

7. Back in 2003, Claudio Borio, the BIS’s Head of the Monetary and Economic Department and an
influential thinker in this area, described the objective of microprudential regulation as limiting the
likelihood of distress at an individual institution. In insurance this objective tends to be aligned to an
objective about the safety and soundness of regulated firms. By contrast, Borio saw the objective of

1

These aspects include, for instance, separation of assets for the management of life and non-life policies. In Germany, the Insurance
Supervisory Law was introduced in 1901; in France, the first state controller of insurance was appointed in 1899 and in Japan the
Insurance Business Law Act was enacted in 1900. Sources: Cummins and Venard (2007), Handbook of International Insurance,
Burling and Lazarus (2011), Research Handbook on International Insurance Law and Regulation.
2
Borio (2003), Towards a macroprudential framework for financial supervision and regulation, BIS working paper 128
2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2

macroprudential policy as limiting the risk of losses to income in the economy arising through the
endogenous behaviour of financial firms and capital markets.

8. According to this view, microprudential regulation is about protecting the firm and its policyholders
from external shocks beyond its control (e.g. a longevity shock, a shock from interest rates, or a
cyber attack) or from risks in the way it manages itself (e.g. because of its business strategy or
3

governance). Macroprudential regulation is about protecting others from the way a firm or a set of
firms contributes to the build-up of risks and to the propagation of amplification of risks.

Lessons from history
9. Looking back at recent financial crises and asking: “what role did insurers play?” can be a helpful
way to assess the limits of microprudential regulation (if any). It also helps in identifying the
channels through which the behaviour of an individual insurance firm or set of firms can propagate
and amplify shocks, with adverse consequences for the macroeconomy.

10. In my reading of history, two amplification channels involving insurers appear to be common to
crises: interconnectedness, including (i) exposure to potentially systemic counterparties or (ii)
common exposures to macro risks and asset liquidation risk stemming from liquidity mismatches
between assets and liabilities. On occasion, we see a third channel at work– lack of substitutability
of critical functions or services. Let me try to illustrate these channels more specifically through a
few historical examples.

11. No paper on systemic risk and insurance can be complete without mentioning AIG and the recent
financial crisis. So, I am afraid, this is the time for it!
12. AIG’s problems stemmed from it being exposed to Mortgage-Backed Securities (MBS) - the
common exposure which was central to the global financial crisis. First, AIG Financial Products
issued credit-default swaps providing protection against the default of MBS and Collateralised Debt
Obligations containing portfolios of MBS. Second, AIG Securities Lending Corporation took the cash
generated by loaning life insurance company assets and invested it in MBS which offered higher
yields.

4

13. When MBS fell in value AIG’s counterparties saw the potential risk from the firm’s business model.
Concomitant falls in AIG’s credit ratings allowed its CDS counterparties to demand more collateral
and they did, leading to severe liquidity strain on the firm. In response to falling market values of the
MBS AIG had acquired via securities lending and this liquidity stress, the firm attempted to liquidate
3

Economists refer to costs imposed on “others” that an agent or set of agents would have no incentive to take into account as negative
externalities. In the context of macroprudential regulation, these “others” are often referred to as the system as a whole.
4
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago (2014) AIG in Hindsight
3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

3

its MBS, into what was, by then, an illiquid market – making it even more illiquid. This is the asset
liquidation channel at work. The exposures of AIG to its CDS and securities lending counterparties
led to fears that, should AIG collapse, the resulting losses would ripple across the financial system,
potentially triggering a wave of further defaults. This is the broader interconnectedness channel at
work (McDonald and Paulson (2015)).

14. The monoline insurers were another example of these channels at work. First, they had a common
exposure to the default of the assets underlying the mortgage-backed securities. Second, they
were significantly interconnected with some potentially systemic counterparties being materially
exposed to their performance. When the major monolines were downgraded in 2008 the securities
they insured were also downgraded, contributing to falling demand for MBS and prices.
15. There are other examples of insurers’ behaviour propagating and amplifying shocks through the
common exposure and the asset liquidation channels in particular. Research has shown that US life
insurers that were suffering strains on their capital sold MBS and other insurers were less willing to
buy them because of concerns about weakening their own capital positions, contributing to falling
values of MBS – the asset liquidation channel at work, once again.

5

16. And in the Netherlands, during the financial crisis, Government support was provided to
bancassurance conglomerates because of concerns that exposure of the banks in the group to MBS
could have a knock-on effect on the insurers of the group – another form of interconnectedness.

6

The Government indicated it was concerned about the ‘pivotal role’ of these insurers, which could be
undermined by a loss of confidence – an example of the substitutability of critical functions and
services channel at work.

7

17. The global financial crisis was the most recent illustration of distressed insurers propagating and
amplifying shocks that impact on others, but there have been others in not so distant history.

18. One example occurred during the Asian crisis. The Republic of Korea experienced a currency crisis
8

in 1997 which led to a sharp rise in interest rates from 12% to 30%. Korean life insurers had
developed a banking type business model, with loans accounting for 40-50% of assets and limited
9

penalties for surrenders of savings policies. When interest rates rose Korean insurers suffered the
opposite common exposure problem of interest rates that a number of firms in various countries

5

Ellul, Jotikasthira, and Lundblad (2011) Regulatory pressure and fire sales in the corporate bond market, Journal of Financial
Economics; Merrill, Nadauld, Stulz, and Sherland (2012) Did capital requirements and fair value accounting spark fire sales in
distressed mortgage-backed securities, Working Paper, Ohio State University.
6
ESRB (2015) Report on systemic risks in the EU insurance sector (Annex 3). In addition, the Netherlands did not have an Insurance
Guarantee Scheme in 2008.
7
Another example of the lack of substitutability channel is the failure of the Australian firm HIH in 2001, see French, Vital, and Minot
(2015) “Insurance and Financial Stability”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 2015 Q3.
8
French, Vital and Minot (2015) ibid pp. 249
9
IMF (2003) Insurance and Issues in Financial Soundness pp. 20
4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

4

are currently experiencing (IMF (2016)).

10

Insurers were hit by a sharp increase in non-performing

loans and a liquidity mismatch, when policyholders surrendered their policies in favour of savings
products offering higher interest rates, and sales of new policies fell. Sales of assets by insurers
because of liquidity problems led to contagion through falling asset prices in already weak financial
11

markets - the asset liquidation channel at work again. The Korean regulator extended the
deposit guarantee schemes to insurance companies to halt the wave of surrenders and liquidity
problems affecting the life insurance sector.

12

19. Another example is the failure of seven mid-size life insurers in Japan during the period 1997-2001.
These insurers had a common exposure to interest rate risk. This is because they issued
guarantees that they were unable to meet as interest rates fell and other assets saw lower returns in
the face of recessionary pressures. These failures did not lead to the need for taxpayer support,
since other firms contributed $7 billion to a policyholder protection fund. However, policyholders for
five of the firms experienced cuts to the values of their own policies, and at the time the IMF was
concerned that the failure of these firms could be systemic. This is because they spilt-over to a
banking sector already weakened by impaired loans through interconnectedness from
cross-ownership.

13

20. Would an effective microprudential regulatory regime have been sufficient to deal with these
problems counterfactually?

21. A microprudential framework that capitalises individual firms ex ante against stresses in interest
rates and other adverse asset price developments can go a long way to deal with problems of
common exposure to macro-risks. In addition, a microprudential capital framework that
encourages firms to match the liquidity of their liabilities with the liquidity of their assets can play a
crucial role in reducing risks from the asset liquidation channel. This can in part be achieved
through an approach to valuation of assets and liabilities that makes a distinction in the structure of
liabilities between those that allow assets to be held long-term and those that might require
immediate sale of assets. If this distinction is not made there is a risk that the value of insurers’
assets and liabilities becomes unnecessarily volatile, which itself can become a source of asset
14

liquidation risk.

A number of extant regimes draw this distinction in the valuation of liabilities in

their microprudential regimes, departing from full market-consistency (or fair value), which also
serves to meet macroprudential objectives (Geneva Association (2016)).

10

IMF (2016) The insurance sector – trends and systemic risks implications, chapter 3, Global Financial Stability Report
Lee (2001) Korean Experiences in Life Insurance Sector Reforms After the Financial Crisis, The Geneva Papers on Risk and
Insurance Vol 26 No 3, pp. 483
12
IMF (2003) ibid, pp. 20
13
IMF (2003) Japan: Financial System Stability Assessment and Supplementary Information
14
This is the type of risk that Borio saw as endogenous, with sales of assets triggering further volatility that market participants react to.
Conversely, making the distinction does not imply that valuation should not be reflective of current economic conditions. Otherwise
market confidence can be put at risk.
11

5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

5

22. In conclusion, a stress-based microprudential capital adequacy framework focussed on protecting
the soundness of the sector as a whole from macro-stresses and from liquidity mismatches while
avoiding excessive balance sheet volatility is a necessary condition to delivering macroprudential
stability. But it is not a sufficient condition. Macroprudential overlays are needed to deal with
macroprudential risks such as interconnections with systemic counterparties and lack of
substitutability. It is also clear, that in the past, and most notably in the great financial crisis, the
failure of individual companies has proved systemic suggesting the need for macroprudential
overlays tailored to these individual companies as well. In a recent article, Felix Hufeld, my
predecessor as Chair of IAIS ExCo and current President of Bafin, has raised similar points.

15

The IAIS is taking forward a broad range of initiatives to develop exactly such a framework.

23. First and foremost, the IAIS is making progress in developing a robust stress-based microprudential
framework. For internationally active insurance groups (IAIGs) this framework will include a
risk-based consolidated group capital requirement – the Insurance Capital Standard (ICS), which is
scheduled for agreement in 2019. But it will also deliver a range of other qualitative standards
designed to address a host of microprudential risks arising from the way a firm is governed and
manages its own risks (ComFrame). At the same time, the IAIS is modernising and developing its
Insurance Core Principles which apply to insurance companies regardless of size and international
exposures.
24. The ICS, ComFrame, and the ICPs are the foundational pillars of the IAIS’s work. But as I have
already said, in my view, they need to be complemented by macroprudential overlays. On that front
as well, the IAIS is making progress, delivering to a mandate requested by the Financial Stability
Board (FSB).

16

25. Earlier this week, the FSB identified 9 Global Systemically Important Insurers (G-SIIs), based on the
IAIS’s recommendation and using end-2015 data.

17

G-SIIs are subject to more intensive supervision

than other IAIGs, which is aimed at managing and mitigating the activities that led to their
18

identification , such as those creating interconnectedness or asset liquidation risks. They are due to
be subject to Higher Loss Absorbency (HLA) capital standards which have been developed in line
with the FSB’s recommendation.

19

The final element of the IAIS’s macroprudential framework for

G-SIIs is recovery and resolution planning policy measures.

20

15

Hufeld (2016) describes the need for a hybrid regulatory approach to address ‘direct’ risks from the behaviour of Global Systemically
Important Insurers and ‘indirect’ risks from collective or sectoral behaviour (as well as to protect policyholders).
16
FSB (2013) Global Systemically Important Insurers (G-SIIs) and the policy measures that will apply to them
17
FSB (2016) 2016 list of global systemically important insurers (G-SIIs)
18
IAIS (2013) Guidance for Systemic Risk Management Plans
19
HLA aims to reduce the probability and impact of a G-SII’s distress or failure on the financial system, see IAIS (2015) Higher Loss
Absorbency Requirements for Global Systemically Important Insurers
20
FSB (2014) Key attributes of effective resolution regimes for financial institutions
6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

6

26. The IAIS’s approach to assessing macroprudential risk and developing macroprudential policy is
evolving as we gain new insights.

27. One of the insights we can draw from the examples I cite is that some of the macroprudential risks
stemmed from insurance companies pushing the boundaries of product design or asset-liability
management, with business models becoming more like those of banks or hedge funds, including so
called Non-traditional, Non-Insurance (NTNI) activities. In June 2016 the IAIS clarified the concept
of NTNI activities, an important factor in the identification of G-SIIs, and updated its methodology for
assessing G-SIIs.

21 22

The IAIS now terms NTNI as Systemic Risk from Insurance Product Features.

Most commentators agreed that business models which incorporated NTNI could play a role in
crises, but it was difficult to create a universal, but precise definition of such activity. The IAIS made
progress by linking the non-traditional part of the definition to the amplification channels of common
exposure to macro risks and asset liquidation. At the same time, in June this year, the IAIS
published its updated G-SII assessment methodology which incorporated these improvements and
made a number of others.

23

28. Overall, the current G-SII identification framework is now closely aligned with the
amplification channels that create the need for macroprudential regulation that I described
above.
29. And the IAIS’s work on improving its framework will not stop here. In both of these June
2016 publications, the IAIS committed to review its framework for defining traditional
activities that give rise to systemic risk to ensure that they are dealt with in a comprehensive
and proportionate manner. In June this year, the IAIS commenced some exploratory work on
an activities-based approach to systemic risk. In October, the IAIS Executive Committee
considered the initial work and agreed to further exploration, including in looking at
interactions with the rest of the IAIS’s workstreams.

24

And earlier this week, the FSB

welcomed the IAIS’s exploration of a complementary activities-based approach to address
systemic risk.

25

30. In my view, the first and probably most crucial step in delivering an activities-based approach is to
ensure that the microprudential framework has the key design features to protect the system against
common exposures to asset prices shocks, asset liquidation risks, excessive volatility in balance
sheets and asset concentration risk from exposure to default by systemic counterparties.

21

IAIS (2016) Systemic risk from insurance product features
IAIS (2016) Global Systemically Important Insurers: Updated Assessment Methodology
The updated G-SII assessment methodology also included a reinsurance supplemental assessment to allow the IAIS to conduct a
more in-depth analysis of third-party reinsurance activities
24
The IAIS’s work is intended to go beyond considering macroprudential risks as they have materialised, and became evident, in past
crises, by exploring a range of behaviour or activities that could contribute to the build-up of systemic risk.
25
FSB (2016) FSB publishes 2016 G-SII list, Press release
22
23

7

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

7

31. The examples from recent financial crises demonstrate it is appropriate for the IAIS to consider the
balance between macroprudential tools that apply to the sector and those that apply only to G-SIIs.
The examples suggest, for instance, that had G-SII identification existed at the time of these crises it
may not have been sufficient to prevent asset liquidation risk. For instance, we can see this in the
case of the behaviour of the insurance sector in Korea during the Asian crisis and the reactions of a
number of firms selling MBS during the global financial crisis. Put differently, a set of companies
acting collectively could have a material effect on asset markets and the financial system as a whole,
without necessarily being individually identified as systemic.

32. Standard setters for other financial sectors besides insurance, have considered, and are considering
the appropriate balance between an entity-based approach and a sectoral or activities-based
approach to mitigating macroprudential risks. For banking, the financial crisis revealed that a
number of banks were too highly levered and had insufficient liquidity buffers to absorb the effects of
credit and trading losses, and the re-intermediation of off-balance sheet exposures. These problems
were amplified through procyclical asset liquidation and counterparty interconnectedness.

26

33. The FSB, in consultation with the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, has therefore adopted
an entity-based approach, with Higher-Loss-Absorbency capital applied to banking groups
designated as Global Systemically Important Banks (G-SIBs). The Basel Committee on Banking
Supervision has, however, also developed a number of macroprudential tools that apply within the
design of the microprudential framework. These tools include higher risk weights for inter-financial
exposures adopted under Basel 3 in 2010

27

and tighter large exposure limits between G-SIBs to
28

address interconnectedness adopted in 2014 ; higher capital requirements for illiquid trading book
exposures through the fundamental review of the trading book adopted in 2015, aimed at guarding
29

against asset liquidation costs and the associated fire-sale externalities ; a leverage ratio in 2014
that guards against leverage in the banking system exceeding a certain amount, irrespective of
banks’ internal assessment of risks;

30

and liquidity regulation under the LCR (Liquidity Coverage

Ratio) and NSFR (Net Stable Funding Ratio) adopted respectively in 2013 and 2014 that provides
incentives to reduce excessive maturity mismatch and the associated asset liquidation
macroprudential costs.

31

The collection of such tools comprise in effect an activities-based approach

to systemic risk in the banking sector because they apply to all internationally-active banks that carry
out these activities, despite the fact that the approach is not explicitly labelled this way.

26

BIS, FSB, and IMF (2011) Macroprudential policy tools and frameworks, update to G20 finance ministers and central bank governors
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2010, updated 2011) Basel III: A global regulatory framework for more resilient banks and
banking systems (pp7/8).
28
Basel Committee on Banking Standards (2014) Supervisory framework for measuring and controlling large exposures (pp16)
29
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2016) Minimum capital requirements for market risk
27

30
31

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2014) Basel III leverage ratio framework and disclosure requirements.

Basel Committee on Banking Standards (2013) Basel III: the liquidity coverage ratio and liquidity risk monitoring tools; and Basel
Committee on Banking Standards (2014) Basel III: the net stable funding ratio
8

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

8

34. For asset managers, the FSB launched a consultation in June 2016 on an activities-based approach
to mitigating the amplification of systemic risk from activities specific to asset management business
models, namely leverage within funds; mismatches between the liquidity of invested assets and
redemption terms; operational risk in transferring investment mandates and clients; and securities
lending.

32

The FSB plans to wait for this work to be completed before finalising its entity-based

assessment of non-bank, non-insurance systemically important financial institutions.

35. These comparisons with other sectors show how they are considering the balance between an
activities-based approach and an entity-based approach to mitigating macroprudential risks. They
do not necessarily imply, however, that the tools developed for the other sectors should be exactly
replicated for the insurance sector, although there may be instances where the economic nature of
the risks are very similar, and tools can readily be adapted to the insurance sector (for example
between life insurers’ unit linked business and the business of open-ended investment funds).

36. One reason why tools developed for other sectors might not be directly applicable is that the
likelihood, timing and effect of the macroprudential risk being propagated and amplified may not
operate in an identical way across sectors because of differences in business models. The business
model of insurers tends to be less susceptible (although as some of the examples illustrate, not
immune) to the type of runs experienced in banking because of solvency concerns, suggesting a
lesser likelihood of insurers needing to liquidate assets. First, insurers are funded to a large extent
by policyholder liabilities with premiums being paid in advance of benefits. Second, redemptions by
policyholders can incur penalties or tax implications. Hence, in general, insurers have less need
than banks to secure funding at times of crisis. At the same time, insurers, unlike asset managers
and more similar to banks, make promises about payoffs to their policyholders that can only be
fulfilled with any confidence if they are partly funded by equity. As a result, insurers with common
exposures to the rest of the financial system - either individually or collectively- can suffer equity
shortfalls at the same time as the rest of the financial system, propagating and amplifying
macroprudential risk through interconnectedness and asset liquidation channels.

37. The second reason is that a macroprudential set of tools builds on the foundations of microprudential
regulations that are tailored to specific activities-based risks. Regulators need to take into account
the combined effect of micro- and macroprudential regulation on firms’ risk-taking behaviour. For
instance, in banking, the macroprudential overlays to minimum capital requirements not only include
the macroprudential considerations affecting the design of the microprudential framework described
in paragraph 33, but also include a countercyclical capital buffer. This buffer is designed to build up
capital in upswings of the financial cycle which can be released to absorb losses in downswings,
bolstering solvency when banks are in most need to maintain funding, while preventing excessive
balance sheet volatility through excessive leveraging followed by excessive deleveraging. Put
32

FSB (2016) Proposed policy recommendations to address structural vulnerabilities from asset management activities
9

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

9

differently, in banking, the macroprudential overlays contain an explicit macroprudential add-on to
capital requirements that goes beyond the features built into the microprudential framework. By
contrast, as part of the development of the microprudential ICS for insurers, the IAIS is
contemplating a countercyclical adjustment by adjusting insurance liability values to avoid creating
incentives for asset liquidation because of falling asset values driven by market illiquidity that could
unduly affect insurers’ solvency.

33

This explicit countercyclical feature is contemplated to be an

integral part of the microprudential framework because it’s linked to the microprudential valuation
framework and the liquidity characteristics of different liabilities.

38. It follows that in insurance the exploration of an activities-based approach to address
systemic risk across the sector should be considered in tandem with the design of a
microprudential framework that provides protection against macro-stresses and from
liquidity mismatches while avoiding excessive balance sheet volatility.

Stakeholder engagement remains important to develop the micro and macro framework

39. As the IAIS continues to develop its range of microprudential and macroprudential tools, and
implements them, engagement with stakeholders remains vital. Stakeholder participation ensures
greater decision-making transparency, better, more proportionate outcomes, and more successful
implementation of IAIS supervisory material.

40. Since its reorganisation over a year ago, the IAIS has engaged more robustly with stakeholders and
is continuing to pursue additional opportunities.

41. In this regard, in January 2016, the IAIS Executive Committee (ExCo) created a Stakeholder
Engagement Task Force (SETF) to identify ways to better achieve its engagement goals. ExCo has
already acted on several recommendations. Firstly, it has opened up the Annual Conference to
stakeholder participants. It was held earlier this month in Asuncion, Paraguay. Secondly, it
expanded the scope of the 2016 Global Seminar held in Budapest, in June, to a two-day event with
significant involvement of diverse stakeholders including some consumer representatives. Thirdly, it
has also sought opportunities to invite stakeholder representatives to speak in its Annual Conference
and Global seminar panels, and invited their contributions to identifying topics for events, particularly
for the ExCo Dialogue held in conjunction with the 2016 Global Seminar. The SETF reported to the
IAIS Executive Committee earlier this month on options for further enhancing stakeholder

33

The IAIS consulted on a market-adjusted valuation approach and a GAAP with adjustments approach in its 2016 consultation on the
ICS. IAIS (2016) Risk-based global insurance capital standard version 1.0, public consultation document
10

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

10

engagement and got approval for engagement on specific proposals with stakeholders later this year
ahead of finalising and publishing a stakeholder engagement plan at the ExCo meeting in early
2017.

42. The strength of engagement has, and continues to be, vital to the IAIS for developing effective and
proportionate policy. The IAIS has much to do in the period before the end of 2019, including
finalising the development of the ICS and Higher Loss Absorbency for G-SIIs, while also reviewing
its framework for identification of activities that give rise to systemic risk. Both will go some way to
achieving the balance of microprudential regulation with macroprudential overlays, which, I believe,
will leave the insurance sector better placed to limit the likelihood and effects of future financial
crises, as well as continuing to deliver safety and soundness by meeting obligations to policyholders.

11

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

11

References
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2010, updated 2011) Basel III: A global regulatory framework for
more resilient banks and banking systems

Basel Committee on Banking Standards (2013) Basel III: the liquidity coverage ratio and liquidity risk
monitoring tools;

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2014) Basel III leverage ratio framework and disclosure
requirements

Basel Committee on Banking Standards (2014) Basel III: the net stable funding ratio

Basel Committee on Banking Standards (2014) Supervisory framework for measuring and controlling large
exposures

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2016) Minimum capital requirements for market risk

BIS, FSB, and IMF (2011) Macroprudential policy tools and frameworks, update to G20 finance ministers and
central bank governors
Borio (2003) “Towards a macroprudential framework for financial supervision and regulation”, BIS working
paper 128

Burling and Lazarus (2011) Research Handbook on International Insurance Law and Regulation

Cummins and Venard (2007) Handbook of International Insurance

Ellul, Jotikasthira, and Lundblad (2011) Regulatory pressure and fire sales in the corporate bond market,
Journal of Financial Economics

ESRB (2015) Report on systemic risks in the EU insurance sector (Annex 3)

Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago (2014) AIG in Hindsight
French, Vital, and Minot (2015) “Insurance and Financial Stability”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 2015
Q3.

FSB (2013) Global Systemically Important Insurers (G-SIIs) and the policy measures that will apply to them
12

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

12

FSB (2014) Key attributes of effective resolution regimes for financial institutions

FSB (2016) Proposed policy recommendations to address structural vulnerabilities from asset management
activities

FSB (2016) 2016 list of global systemically important insurers (G-SIIs)

FSB (2016) FSB publishes 2016 G-SII list, Press release
Geneva Association (2016) Modernising insurance solvency regimes – key features of selected markets

Hufeld (2016) A regulatory framework for systemic risk in the insurance industry, in The Economics,
Regulation, and Systemic Risk of Insurance Markets, Hufeld, Koijen, and Thimann eds, Oxford University
Press

IAIS (2013) Guidance for Systemic Risk Management Plans

IAIS (2015) Higher Loss Absorbency Requirements for Global Systemically Important Insurers

IAIS (2016) Risk-based global insurance capital standard version 1.0, public consultation document

IAIS (2016) Global Systemically Important Insurers: Updated Assessment Methodology

IAIS (2016) Systemic risk from insurance product features

IMF (2003) Insurance and Issues in Financial Soundness

IMF (2003) Japan: Financial System Stability Assessment and Supplementary Information
IMF (2016) The insurance sector – trends and systemic risks implications, Chapter 3, Global Financial
Stability Report
Lee (2001) “Korean Experiences in Life Insurance Sector Reforms After the Financial Crisis”, The Geneva
Papers on Risk and Insurance Vol 26 No 3
McDonald and Paulson (2015) “AIG in Hindsight”, NBER Working Paper No 21108

13

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

13

Merrill, Nadauld, Stulz, and Sherland (2012) “Did capital requirements and fair value accounting spark fire
sales in distressed mortgage-backed securities”, Working Paper, Ohio State University

14

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

14

