Macroeconomic Policy Rules in Theory and in Practice
Speech given by
Christopher Allsopp, Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England

To the Conference on ‘Policy Rules – The Next Steps’, Cambridge University, Cambridge
19 September 2002

I am extremely grateful to Amit Kara and Ed Nelson for assistance and useful discussions in the
course of the preparation of this paper. I also thank Jagjit Chadha for useful comments on a previous
draft. The views expressed here are personal and should not be interpreted as those of the Bank of
England or other members of the Monetary Policy Committee.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

I

Introduction

It is a great pleasure to address this distinguished conference on policy rules. My task, as
I understand it, is to set the scene from the standpoint of someone engaged in the
monetary policy process—with an emphasis on the two-way interaction between policy
and academic enquiry. Certainly, as compared with the situation a decade or so ago,
there is a recognisable consensus, with developments in policy, in macroeconomic
theory, and in empirical analysis pulling, so to speak, in the same direction.
I will structure my presentation as follows. Section II is my take on the emerging
consensus. In that context, I will outline some of the features of the current UK system
which seem particularly important as well as indicating some areas of continuing
difficulty. Section III goes back to consider the wider historical and theoretical debate
over policy rules. Whilst the consensus has it that interest-rate policy reaction functions
should be ‘rule-like’ (Taylor, 1993; Meyer, 2002), it is equally true that systems such as
that in the UK can be described as embodying ‘constrained discretion’ (Bernanke and
Mishkin 1997, p. 106; King, 1997a, p. 440; Balls, 2001). Where does this leave the
‘rules versus discretion’ debates of the past? And how rule-bound should central banks
be in practice? Section IV returns, in a highly selective way, to some of the unresolved
issues. How, for example, should policy-makers treat fluctuations in asset prices? What
difference does openness make? How can forecasts and policy reactions be improved in
the face of various types of uncertainty? What is, or should be, the role of fiscal policy?
Section V concludes.
II The consensus
A rough characterisation of the developing consensus on macroeconomic policy design
would include the following:
1. There is no long-run trade-off between nominal developments (inflation) and the real
economy (homogeneity, degree zero, of the nominal price and wage system).
2. It is essential to establish a credible, non-accommodating policy to control the price
level and inflation.
3. The primary responsibility for the control of inflation should be assigned to monetary
policy.
4. Monetary policy should be carried out by an independent central bank.
1

5. The principal instrument of policy is the short-term interest rate.
6. The central bank’s responsibilities in controlling inflation in the medium term should
be carried out at minimum cost in terms of deviations of output from potential and
deviations of inflation from target.
Clearly, different parts of the consensus have different status. Thus, whilst 1 and 2 may
be regarded as fundamental, 3, 4 and 5 are instrumental and more contentious—
alternative choices and arrangements could be made and have existed in the past. The
important qualification, 6, requires welfare judgements or at least some scheme for
weighting together different costs.
Recent legislation, defining mandates for central banks, reflects these complex
objectives. Thus, the European Central Bank (ECB) is charged with maintaining price
stability and without prejudice to that, to support the policies of the European
Commission as laid out in Article II of the Treaty—which include growth and
employment. The Bank of England Act, similarly, adopts a hierarchical or lexicographic
ordering, charging the Monetary Policy Committee with maintaining price stability and,
subject to that, with supporting the policies of the government for employment and
growth. In the United States, there are multiple objectives, but given the widespread
agreement on 1 and 2 above, there has, in recent years, been a hierarchical ordering there
too.
In the economics literature, the monetary authority’s behaviour is typically described in
terms of the abstract concept of its reaction function, which delineates how the
instruments of policy are adjusted in response to (a) its targets, and (b) its assessment of
the current and future state of the economy. Assuming that the instrument of policy is the
short-term nominal interest rate, the interest-rate reaction function can thus be seen as an
algorithmic rule or feedback system describing how the monetary authority attempts to
home in on its objectives. Simple versions of such reaction functions abound, including
the Taylor rule (where the interest rate is taken as responding to current deviations of
inflation from target and output from potential) and that implicit in inflation forecast
targeting regimes, where interest rates react to deviations of forecast inflation from
target.1 In practice, the reaction function is embedded in an institution—usually the
———————————————————————————————————————————
1
See Svensson (1997) for pioneering academic work on inflation forecast targeting, and Batini and
Haldane (1999) for a discussion of incorporating inflation forecasts into policy rules with emphasis on the
UK.

2

central bank together with associated constitutional and other arrangements—and may
involve a complex set of procedures and judgements. It is unlikely to be expressible as a
single simple rule—at the least it would involve a set of anticipated contingent
responses.2
The reaction function approach brings out several intertwined aspects of the current
practice of monetary policy. The first might be termed the nominal anchor function: the
assignment of medium-term responsibility for the control of the price level or inflation to
the monetary authority. This function, in turn, has two dimensions. The first is the target
itself—which may be explicitly quantified (as in the UK) or implicitly defined, e.g. as
price stability. The practical question of how the target should be made operational and
measured is not as straightforward as sometimes appears. The second dimension is the
instrument of policy and the feedback system, which together must be sufficiently
powerful to achieve the medium-term objective for prices and inflation.
The second general aspect of current practice is the stabilisation function, capturing the
idea that the medium-term objective should ideally be achieved at minimum cost (e.g. in
terms of deviations of inflation from target and output from potential). The optimum
reaction function clearly depends on the characteristics of the economy, on the shocks
anticipated, and on the welfare judgements made. Since the optimum reaction function is
likely to be highly sensitive to alternative models and specifications and shocks, there is
interest in simple rules which produce reasonably good results and which appear robust.
The practical policy analogue is the search for a set of procedures which delivers a
sensible reaction function with desirable properties in a wide range of possible
circumstances.
The monetary policy reaction function is thus an extremely important part of the way in
which the economic system as a whole functions; and for the system to function well, it
must have, and be perceived to have, appropriate properties. With forward-looking
behaviour, it is the credibility of policy as embodied in the reaction function that
stabilises expectations of inflation. But there is more to it than that. Combined with a
standard ‘natural-rate’ or ‘accelerationist’ view of inflationary pressure, an ‘appropriate’
reaction function should lead to the anticipation of longer-term economic growth at
———————————————————————————————————————————
2
In the simplest approaches involving demand shocks and price shocks (often described misleadingly as
‘supply shocks’), policy involves offsetting demand shocks completely whilst price-level or Phillips curve
shocks involve a trade-off between the variability of the output gap and inflation.

3

potential rates and the understanding that deviations of output from potential and inflation
from target will (in some sense) be as small as possible given the shocks hitting the
economy. This ‘two-for-one’ aspect of inflation target regimes has been stressed (in the
context of euro area monetary policy) by, for example, Alesina et al (2001). From a
political-economy point of view, the idea that well designed inflation-targeting regimes
are also ‘employment-friendly’, is of the utmost importance in gaining acceptance of the
framework. The same general line of argument points to the importance of
transparency—on which more below.
So far I have been speaking rather generally about a certain type of monetary policy
regime which combines longer-term control of inflation with activist stabilisation in the
short term. Within such a framework, one can imagine many different institutional
arrangements—many different reaction functions, some no doubt, better than others. Like
other matters of definition, it is hard to define exactly what is meant by an appropriate
regime, but we mostly recognise it when we see it. (Just as we recognise cats and
distinguish them from dogs, though most of us without a degree in biology would be hard
pressed to define the difference.) Again from a political-economy point of view, what
really matters is that an appropriate policy framework should be instituted with the right
general properties. That then leads on to a second set of questions about improving or
even optimising performance. To use another analogy, a boat without a helmsman is an
indeterminate system. With a helmsman in place, there is a good chance that the boat
will move across the bay in the direction desired by the operator. The big question is
whether there is a helmsman in the boat or not. But, of course, the boat would function
much better and more predictably with a skilled steersman than a novice. The debate
about policy rules has now moved, it may be argued, beyond the question about how to
pin down the rate of inflation and provide a nominal anchor to centre on how to become
better at steering the economy.
Characteristics of the UK system
UK post-war history is littered with attempts to design a macroeconomic framework to
provide a nominal anchor against inflation combined with a reasonable amount of
stabilisation. Most ended in failure, usually with serious conflict between internal and
external objectives. Inflation targeting was introduced in 1992 after Sterling was ejected
from the ERM. The present regime, with monetary policy delegated to the Monetary
Policy Committee at the Bank of England, was instituted in May 1997.
4

UK policy clearly owes much to the ‘demonstration effect’ from the perceived reaction
function of the independent Federal Reserve in the US. US experience could not,
however, be simply transplanted. The Federal Reserve is both goal-independent and
instrument-independent and, in formal terms, the reaction function is hardly pinned down
at all. One of its objectives is ‘price stability’, but the nearest anyone has come to
defining what is meant by price stability is Greenspan’s (2002a, p. 6) famous remark that
‘…price stability is best thought of as an environment in which inflation is so low and
stable over time that it does not materially enter into the decisions of households and
firms.’ Instead, the perceived reaction function is reputational—deduced from historical
behaviour since the early/mid 1980s. The original Taylor rule was put forward as
descriptive of Federal Reserve behaviour, though Taylor himself has argued (e.g. 1999,
2000) that it has desirable properties across a wide variety of possible models of the
economy. In the UK, whilst the experience of inflation targeting from 1992–97 had been
favourable, the reputational route to the establishment of a credible reaction function was
not really available in 1997. Not only was there a new government, but also there was a
history of monetary failure, reflected in financial market expectations and risk premia,
despite the relatively good inflation performance from 1992-93 onward. What was
needed was the establishment of a credible monetary policy—a credible and appropriate
reaction function—via institutional design. It goes without saying that academic work on
policy rules, on credibility, and on the kinds of properties that interest-rate reaction
functions should have (including, of course, studies of successful versus unsuccessful
historical experiences), were crucial inputs into that process—and that they remain
crucial in the adaptation of the MPC process over time.
I am not going to give a long account of the UK system, the broad characteristics of
which are well known.3 But I do want to pick out a few points which seem important
from the point of view of system design.
1. The target
The general commitment to price stability (and, subject to that, to supporting the
government’s policies for growth and employment) is defined in the Bank of England Act
1998, where it is also laid down that it is the Chancellor of the Exchequer’s responsibility
to set the target. A well-known feature is that the target is set as a single number (not a
———————————————————————————————————————————
3
There are many accounts of the operation of the Monetary Policy Committee in the UK. See especially
King (1997a, 2002), Balls (2001), Balls and O’Donnell (2001), and Bean and Jenkinson (2001).

5

range), and that it is set in a forward-looking but effectively time-independent manner.
The target could change, but in practice has been maintained at 2.5% for the annual rate
of change of the series RPIX since inception in 1997. An oft-cited reason for retaining
governmental responsibility for setting and defining the target is that it is the government
that is democratically accountable to the public. It also means that the delegation of
responsibility for meeting the target to the MPC is particularly clear-cut.
With a point target which defines an aspiration in a timeless way, it is obvious to all that
it will not be exactly met, so that ideas of shocks, uncertainty, and constrained discretion
are, arguably, built-in from the start. The symmetry of the objective, whereby shortfalls
in inflation are treated as of equal importance to overshoots, is appropriate to a reactionfunction type of feedback system and, as already noted, has proved extremely important
in gaining public acceptance of the inflation target regime.4
2. Central bank independence and delegation
Thus the Bank of England is instrument-independent not goal-independent. It has long
been recognised in the UK that the principal instrument of monetary policy is the shortterm interest rate,5 so the task of the MPC is, in principle, very straightforward: to use its
control of the short-term interest rate to meet, as far as possible, the externally-given
objective. But what is the reason for delegation?
It is tempting to see the answer in terms of the academic literature on time-inconsistency
and the inflation bias, in particular the argument made famous by Rogoff (1985) that the
bias would be reduced by delegation to a conservative central banker. I would not want
to deny that this literature was, in general terms, influential, but it does not really ring
true as the reason for the institutional change. If there were an inflation bias, it could still
apply to the target-setters—the government—though the institutional change can be seen
———————————————————————————————————————————
4
An ‘open letter’ system operates, also symmetrically, if the divergence from target in any given month
exceeds one percentage point, and should be regarded more as an ‘enabling device’ in the event of major
shocks (such as oil crises) than as a sanction in the event of divergence from target. Surprisingly, given
historical experience in the UK, no open letter has been triggered since the inception of the new system.
Even more surprisingly, the nearest it has come to being triggered was on the downside in July this year
when annual RPIX inflation for June came in at 1.5%.
5
There was a brief flurry of debate in the UK over monetary base control in the early 1980s, which fizzled
out. Monetary targeting in the UK was of the ‘indicator’ variety, with interest rates used to try to meet the
intermediate objective. From this point of view, the chosen aggregate was unfortunate in that broad money
was not easily controllable by the instrument (since it was interest-bearing), and the relationship between
the monetary aggregate and the final objectives was weak, unreliable, and changing over time.

6

as a form of commitment technology, with costs involved in opportunistically changing
or abolishing the target. But, as far as the monetary authority itself is concerned, it is
widely argued that the time-inconsistency problem is not an issue. Bean (1998a) simply
removes the temptation to ‘cheat’ or ‘renege’ from the central bank’s objective function,6
a procedure which can be seen as supported by statements by Blinder (1998), who,
writing about the US, sees no temptation to generate surprise inflation, and, more recently
by Meyer (2002), who also downplays any importance of time-inconsistency issues.7
Vickers (1998), writing as the Bank of England’s Chief Economist and a member of the
MPC, suggested further that no Walsh (1995)-type incentives are necessary, as there is no
incentive to want to generate inflationary surprises or to run the economy at anything
other than at its natural rate of output/unemployment. He states that, ‘Quite apart from
our statutory duty, we have the strongest professional and reputational incentives, which
in my opinion are incapable of being enhanced by financial incentives, to get as close as
we can to the inflation target.’
What this means is that the main point of delegation is not to employ conservative
financiers, nor to set up a system of compensating incentives, but simply to hand over
responsibility for the ‘reaction function’ to a technically-competent authority charged
with doing the job as well as possible. Credibility is important, but credibility here has
little to do with the meaning derived from the inflation bias literature, and a great deal to
do with clearly-specified objectives and with competence and trust that the job will be
done as well as possible. This means that explanation of procedures, transparency and
accountability are key aspects of the system.
3. The operation of the MPC
Arguably, the system in the UK is as transparent and accountable as any in the world.
The nine members of the MPC (five ‘internal’ and four ‘external’) are individually
accountable under the Act for their votes: interest-rate decisions are by simple majority:
the votes of each member are published within the Minutes, which appear after two
weeks. Moreover, the MPC is severally responsible for the quarterly Inflation Reports,
and the assessments and two-year-ahead forecasts for GDP growth and inflation
———————————————————————————————————————————
6
This practice does not preclude the possibility that the steady-state value of potential GDP is inefficiently
low from society’s point of view, due to e.g. monopolistic distortions, but effectively delegates
responsibility for eliminating the effects of these inefficiencies to microeconomic policy (as advocated by
e.g. Meade, 1951, and Rotemberg and Woodford, 1997).
7
See also Posen (1993), McCallum (1995), King (1996, 1997b), and Taylor (1997) for related discussions.

7

published therein. (The forecasts are published as fan-charts, with probability ranges, to
emphasise the inevitable uncertainty.) There are other checks and balances, such as
appearances before Parliament’s Treasury Select Committee and supervision of
procedures by the Court of Directors of the Bank of England.
As far as the operation of policy is concerned, the process can be described as an inflation
forecast target regime—a process which, along with the institution of the Inflation
Report, was taken over from the system in place in 1992-97. The usual justifications for
the focus on future inflation (e.g. Svensson, 1997, 2002) are lags in the transmission
mechanism, and the need to take account of a potentially large number of influences on
the inflation process. Decisions are taken at relatively high frequency on a monthly
timetable, with procedures in place for additional meetings if necessary.8 The forecasts
are quarterly. Pragmatically, it is sometimes useful to see the process as divided into
two: the assessment of the current and future state of the economy on the one hand; and
the response or reaction to that assessment on the other. Given the structure of the MPC,
there are, in principle, nine different assessments, nine potentially different reaction
functions, and a majority voting procedure that translates all that into an interest-rate
decision. Despite the underlying complexity, the broad characteristics of the overall
reaction function (using the term rather generally) are discernible and relatively
predictable.
A feature of the UK system with individual accountability and transparency is that it
leads to publicly-expressed disagreements and dissent as well as, obviously, public
knowledge of closely-split votes. Early worries that both of these would work against
credibility and be destabilising now appear unfounded. If, as argued, the relevant
meaning of ‘credibility’ is a reputation for competence and trust in the system, then this
should not be surprising. Given large uncertainty, it is presumably reassuring rather than
otherwise that disagreements and differing assessments occur, are discussed and are
resolved as far as policy is concerned by the decision-making procedures.
The discernibility and predictability of monetary policy in the UK have, I would argue,
been greatly enhanced during the operation of the new system. I want to stress two
aspects. The first is the consequence of the successful offsetting response to the Asia
crisis and the Russian Default (the latter occurred in late August 1998). Interest rates
———————————————————————————————————————————
8
This has happened once since inception—after the terrorist attacks of September 11th, 2001.

8

were substantially cut in stages against the developing consensus perception that a quite
serious recession was more or less inevitable in 1999. In the event, that incipient
recession was headed off; the reaction function worked. Perhaps even more importantly,
it led to public understanding that the reaction function really was intended to operate
symmetrically—and, relatedly, that inflation targeting also involved output-gap
stabilisation. The second point is that in innumerable speeches, presentations and
discussions by members of the MPC, it has been commonplace to stress the
conditionality of policy. Thus, it is well understood that lower growth, should it
eventuate, would (other things being equal) trigger a monetary easing. It is well
understood that, should inflationary pressure arise, whether for demand-side or for
supply-side reasons, monetary tightening would ensue—and if that proved insufficient,
there would be further interest rises until it was sufficient. It is also understood that,
should fiscal policy change, there would be compensating interest-rate reactions to
maintain consistency with the inflation target. (Thus, doubts about the monetary
response to a fiscal tightening, which have been expressed, for example, about the system
in place in the euro area, do not seem to be problem in the UK context.) All this means
that the broad features of the reaction function in place in the UK increasingly seem to be
publicly-understood and built into expectations. The reaction function could not easily
be expressed as a policy rule—but appears ‘rule-like’ in the sense of Taylor (1993), with
the caveat that the rule-like behaviour involves contingent responses.
Indeed, success in stabilising medium-term anticipations of growth, unemployment and
inflation could itself be the source of problems if, as recently, offsetting strategies
contribute to imbalances between sectors and rising prices for assets such as houses.
4. Did it work?
On the face of it, in terms of outcomes for inflation and growth, the UK system has
worked well—though it is usual to qualify such remarks with the observation that it is too
soon to tell. Chart 1.1 displays the record on annual RPIX inflation. It suggests that
there has been a remarkable improvement in inflation since inflation targets were adopted
in 1992 and a moderate undershoot in the last few years. If anything, the chart suggests
that it was the adoption of an inflation-targeting regime that was important rather than the
radically new arrangements introduced in 1997.

9

Chart 1.1: UK inflation performance under different monetary regimes
Annual
change %
22
20
18
16
14
12

ERM
membership

10

DM
'shadowing'

MTFS

8

Inflation
targeting

6

MPC
framework

4
2

1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

0
2002

Source: HM Treasury (2002), Budget 2002.

Chart 2.1, taken from HM Treasury (2002), shows much more clearly the effect of the
new arrangements. There was a marked effect on inflation expectations at the time of the
announcement of the new regime, suggesting that institutional change had indeed had a
substantial effect on the credibility of macroeconomic policy. Other evidence, not
10

detailed here, confirms a slower but highly favourable effect on public expectations and
anticipations. And, as noted above, the more qualitative impression is that the reaction
function in the UK has come to be increasingly well understood and that the regime
change commands a degree of public support.
5. Some issues
All this suggests that the UK system can be seen as a monetary regime of the right sort,
embodying a reaction function (using the term generally) of the right type. To revert to
an earlier analogy, the boat has a helmsman and the objectives are clear. This is a very
big change. But a caveat is again necessary. Most previous attempts at redesigning UK
macroeconomic policy were also put forward as solutions to the problem of combining
inflation control with economic stability—and failed. Why should the new system fare
differently? The answer, I believe, is that the system is better-designed, since it
incorporates not only some of the major lessons from history, but also the major insights
that have come from theoretical and empirical research on monetary policy and monetary
policy rules.
None of this, of course, means that the system could not be improved or that difficulties
have not arisen. Some difficulties concern the reaction function, such as how policy
should react to exchange-rate movements, which have been large, or asset-price changes,
which have also been large. Some relate to uncertainty, both regarding the data and
about how the economy functions. Some relate to forecasting—both as to how it should
best be done, and the relationship between the forecast process and policy formation. I
have some remarks about all these later in this address. I also want to say something
about the interaction between monetary policy and other policies—especially fiscal
policy—since it would be a great mistake to think of a well-functioning monetary system
as, in some sense, closing the debate over macroeconomic policy and the policy mix. On
the contrary, a well-functioning monetary policy is likely to throw the spotlight onto
other aspects of overall policy design.
III. Rules versus discretion
The debate over rules versus discretion has been going on for a very long time—but, for
present purposes, a convenient starting point is Friedman’s (1968) advocacy of a fixed
(3-5% per annum) growth for the money supply. Clearly, one aspect was the advocacy
11

of the money supply as the medium-term nominal anchor of the system. The other, more
negative, aspect was to eschew activist short-term stabilisation via money supply
changes. In modern (or semi-modern) dress, we would say that the policy would set up
an interest-rate reaction function against price and output disturbances—the interest-rate
responses depending on the demand for money function. But would it be a good reaction
function in the sense I have been describing? There are a number of reasons, with long
historical pedigrees, why it might not be, even if the paradigm of the money supply as the
policy instrument is accepted. As is well known, Keynes, in the General Theory, argued
that the ‘self-regulating’ mechanism of price flexibility may work badly, and may even
be unstable if all that policy does to anchor the system is to fix the money supply. If
price rises trigger increases in inflation expectations, real interest rates could even fall in
the short run, a perverse response.9 An extreme version of this type of story is the familiar
hyper-inflation model of Cagan (1956). If we think of the monetary base as the control
instrument, potential instabilities could be magnified by pro-cyclical movements in the
velocity of circulation of money or of the supply of commercial bank deposits. Patinkin
(1969) argues that the inter-war Chicago tradition (as represented, for example, by Henry
Simons) favoured counter-cyclical monetary policy for these reasons.10 There is a danger
that money supply rules would fail to meet the ‘Taylor principle’: that is, expressed in the
form of interest-rate reaction functions of the type studied empirically by Clarida, Galí,
and Gertler (1998), the monetary policy arrangements should have the property that real
interest rates rise with any increase in inflation.11 There is a clear danger too that the
nominal anchor function would be compromised if the demand-for-money function was
unstable over time—which turned out to be the case for the principal aggregates targeted.
The Friedman paradigm was influential in the widespread adoption of monetary targets in
the 1970s. One reason was that the central bank practice of operating on nominal interest
rates risked producing falls in real interest rates, a perverse and destabilising response, in
———————————————————————————————————————————
9
Keynes, in Chapter 19 of (1936), was more concerned with the problem of real interest rates rising during
price deflation—a pathology now familiar in Japan.
10
Friedman (1967) and King (1997b, p. 85) also discuss Simons’ views on monetary policy. It should be
noted that Simons specifically rejected a monetary policy framework based on targeting future inflation.
He advocated targeting current values of a cyclically-sensitive price index: ‘The index must be highly
sensitive; otherwise, the administrative authority would be compelled to postpone its actions unduly after
significant disturbances or (Heaven forbid!) obliged to use discretion in anticipating changes.’ (Simons,
1948, p. 329).
11
The idea that non-inflationary stability can be achieved by fixing the money supply is still extraordinarily
influential. Hicks wrote in 1967: ‘We still have a Currency School, seeking in vain—but one sees why—
for a monetary system that shall be automatic.’ (Hicks, 1967, p. viii). This is much less true now, largely
reflecting the experience with monetary targeting.

12

the face of price shocks—such as occurred in the early 1970s. Switching to a fixed
money supply rule would, it was claimed, lead to real interest rate rises—a better (though
not necessarily optimal) response. In fact, however, the practical adoption of monetary
targets also involved using the short-term interest rate as the instrument of control. There
is really no dispute—nor was there in the early 1970s—that the central bank’s control
over money in developed financial systems is indirect, via the short-term interest rate.
With the interest rate as instrument, the reaction-function approach gives a coherent
account of how monetary targeting works in practice. The reaction function involves the
monetary authorities using the interest rate to meet a target for the quantity of money (the
term ‘money supply’ is to be avoided). If the chosen aggregate really is related causally
to the price level, this would provide an appropriate nominal anchor. But it is not
necessary for there to be a causal link. Even if money is endogenously supplied (given
the interest rate) by the private banking sector, the policy could work so long as the
chosen aggregate were a good indicator of the state of the economy and so long as, in the
longer term, the quantity of ‘money’ was closely related to the final objective (the price
level, for example)—that is, so long as there were a reasonably stable money demand
function. The system could even work if the monetary target were completely
meaningless causally in determining prices (e.g., if the chosen target were notes and coins
in the hands of the public, which are supplied on demand). The interest-rate reaction
function would be doing the work, with the monetary aggregate performing the role of
indicator.
The abandonment of monetary targeting in most countries reflected the bitter experience
that monetary aggregates turned out to be a very poor basis for a monetary policy
reaction function designed to provide a nominal anchor and to stabilise the economy. For
the UK, Nigel Lawson, in his autobiography, noting that the chosen target aggregate
(Sterling M3) proved ‘treacherous’, sounds an appropriate note of regret: ‘We did not
abandon the monetarist guiding light. It was the light that abandoned us.’ (Lawson, 1992,
p. 987). Other reaction functions, such as those based on targeting the exchange rate,
also failed, sometimes spectacularly as with the ejection of the pound sterling from the
European Monetary System in 1992.
Cecchetti (2000), amongst many others, is sceptical, even scathing, about monetary
targets. He finds no use for them, preferring instead a policy of targeting inflation itself
(though this does not, of course, rule out the possible statistical usefulness of various
13

monetary aggregates as part of the overall process of assessing likely future
developments in inflation). In fact the abandonment of monetary targeting did not lead,
as Lawson had feared, to a wholesale return to government discretion and judgement, but
progressively to the adoption of inflation target-type regimes based on interest-rate
reaction functions and ‘constrained discretion’ of the general type I have been discussing.
This does not represent the abandonment of the objectives of monetary rules. On the
contrary, the recognition of the need for a medium-term nominal anchor has, if anything,
been strengthened. The automatic function of ‘money’ as nominal anchor has had to give
way to policy targets for inflation itself and the instrument of policy is seen as the shortterm interest rate rather than the money supply. Automatic responses to shocks have
been replaced by a policy-determined feedback system. Finally, with the reintroduction
of Keynesian stabilisation concerns, there is recognition that the reaction function needs
to be designed to provide the medium-term nominal anchor at minimum cost in terms of
output-gap and price fluctuations.12
I have already referred to the other main strand of the rules literature, stemming from the
seminal article by Kydland and Prescott (1977). The problem, which applies equally to a
strict monetary target and to inflation or price-level targets supported by reaction
functions, is that such policies might not be ‘credible’. In practice, there are many
reasons other than time-inconsistency why this might be so—including perceptions of
lack of competence or lack of instruments. The huge literature on time-inconsistency
focuses, however, on one particular problem: the possibility that if the inflation target
were achieved, the policy-maker would face a temptation to cheat, leading, in simple
models, to an ‘inflation bias’. One kind of solution to such a problem would be to remove
discretion via commitment to a fixed money supply rule, with the danger, however, that
other aspects of credibility would be compromised.13 I have already noted that it is part of
the policy consensus that the inflation bias problem is effectively removed by the
delegation of monetary policy to an independent central bank with clearly specified
objectives and responsibilities.
Assuming that this is so as far as the operation of monetary policy is concerned, the split
UK system, with the target set by the government, is interesting. In principle, as noted
———————————————————————————————————————————
12
Recall that Friedman’s argument against short-term stabilisation, or a counter-cyclical money supply
policy, was unknown and variable lags—a form of model uncertainty.
13
The lack of discretion in the face of shocks might then lead to serious instabilities, lowering the
credibility of the system. Locking the steering wheel on a vehicle is not a good way of committing to a
destination.

14

above, the time-inconsistency problem could continue to apply due to the government’s
control over the target itself, or, more generally, the government could renege and be
seen to be likely to renege, by abandoning the system itself. I argued, above, that such
behaviour was constrained, and can be seen to be constrained, by the reputational and
political losses involved in opportunistically changing the target or weakening the
system. This, however, is subject to the major caveat that such costs must actually be
present. Arguably, they will be present and highly constraining, if the system itself is
publicly understood and commands general support—and not otherwise. The practical
point here is that a constituency of general support for non-accommodating policies and
inflation control is necessary for the system to work as intended. This is another aspect
of transparency and accountability, which needs to be taken extremely seriously by
central banks and governments alike.
IV Some issues
Thus, arguably, the system in the UK is well designed, both institutionally and in terms of
some of the main lessons from the policy rules literature. It may not have been fully
‘tested in adversity’—though it has survived some pretty major shocks since inception.
That said, there are a number of issues of continuing concern. The following is a
selective account of some of them.
A. Asset prices: the stock market and house prices
What might be described as the prevailing central bank consensus on this issue is well set
out by Vickers (1999). He argues that (a) asset prices should not be part of the definition
of the target for inflation or of the loss function of the monetary authorities; (b) that asset
prices contain considerable information relevant to forecasting the future state of the
economy; and (c) that in an inflation forecast targeting regime, ‘it is neither necessary nor
desirable for monetary policy to respond to changes in asset prices, except to the extent
that they help to forecast inflationary or deflationary pressures’ (Bernanke and Gertler,
1999, p. 115: emphasis added by Vickers).
This baseline view, which the late Rudi Dornbusch labelled ‘the received wisdom’
(Dornbusch, 1999, p. 129), has been challenged by Cecchetti et al (2000, 2002), who
argue that it is consistent with inflation-forecast targeting for monetary policy to react to
contain bubbles or other departures from the fundamentals. These authors are also
15

reasonably optimistic that such departures can be identified in practice—they suggest that
the problem is probably no worse than the problem of identifying the natural rate or
NAIRU. Clearly, the question of whether boom/bust cycles in asset prices should be
headed off by monetary policy is highly topical—focussing, obviously, on the behaviour
of the stock market in the US and, to a lesser extent, on the house price boom in the UK.
Moreover, there have been spectacular episodes in the past where boom/bust cycles have
been associated with major instability and economic problems—notably, as far as stockmarket prices are concerned, the Great Crash in the US in the inter-war years and, more
recently, the asset price bubble in Japan in the late 1980s with its deflationary aftermath
which is still continuing. (See, for example, Borio and Lowe, 2002). And as far as house
prices are concerned, the UK boom of the late 1980s and subsequent bust is still regarded
as an exemplar of bad macroeconomic policy.14 There is no doubt that asset-price
movements of the boom/bust type are perceived as a problem by policy-makers and,
unfortunately, there is no particular reason to believe that the potential problems would
simply go away just because a successful inflation-targeting regime had been established.
There is an issue, however, as to whether the monetary authorities should alter their
behaviour as a result.
Suppose we think of the problem, in stripped-down terms, as involving the anticipation of
a large positive shock followed by a large negative shock with the negative shock
(roughly) balancing the positive shock—so that the negative shock is larger, the larger the
preceding positive shock. (Such a pattern would result, for example, from some
stock/flow adjustment process.) The baseline position is that the consequences would be
taken into account in the forward-looking procedures of the monetary authority and that
the consequences for output and price instability would then be minimised in terms of
some loss function. That is the end of the story as far as interest rates are concerned.
Clearly, however, if there were some other policy instrument capable of lowering the
magnitude of the first shock (and by construction therefore the second shock as well), it
would be desirable that that policy should be used.15 The task of the monetary authorities
would be eased and, of course, short of completely successful offsets by the monetary
authorities, the instability of the economy would be reduced and welfare would be
———————————————————————————————————————————
14
Similar experiences took place in several Scandinavian countries.
15
It is perhaps notable, that, in his newspaper column, Krugman (2002), criticising Chairman Greenspan
for having allowed the US stock market boom to develop to the point where a destabilising bust was likely,
suggested that margin requirements to discourage speculation should have been introduced early on in the
boom. He did not suggest that the interest-rate instrument should have been used.

16

increased. The first-best response—which may of course be unrealistic or costly for
other reasons—is that sources of instability should be tackled at source, removing or
lowering the magnitude of the negatively correlated shocks themselves. As a practical
example, consider the house price boom in the UK. If the rising house prices are
regarded as a problem because they are likely to reverse and pose problems in the future,
there are many who would argue that a first-best solution is that the factors behind such
destabilising behaviour in the housing market should be tackled directly rather than by
interest rates.
From the inflation-targeting perspective, the interesting question is what should be done
in the absence of alternative policies. As second-best, should interest-rate policy be
diverted from its normal role, not to target an asset price, but to check some cumulative
process early on—in effect, to lower the magnitude of the correlated shocks under
discussion? The argument for so doing would be that the variances of inflation and
output would be thereby reduced—which is perfectly consistent with standard
interpretations of the loss function.16 But there is a trade-off involved (Bordo and Jeanne,
2002). The reduction in the shocks likely to hit the economy, if it can be achieved (it is
quite a big if), takes the monetary authorities closer to their objective. But the diversion
of the instrument from its normal role takes them further away (effectively imposing
additional variability on the economy). The first needs to be bigger than the second for
the policy to be desirable.
One can see why much of the discussion in favour of central banks using interest rates in
this way is conducted in terms of heading off bubble-type phenomena. The presumption
is that the longer a bubble path goes on, the bigger the bust when it comes. There is an
easy-to-make assumption that a timely upward move in interest rates, even though not
justified in terms of the inflation target and the normal reaction function, would prick the
bubble, lowering both the upward and downward aspects of the shock. Typically, it is
further assumed that the upward movement of the interest rate is not too large and that it
is short-lived (so the costs from this aspect of the policy are small) and the benefit in
terms of shock reduction is large. Such arguments are usually helped by 20/20 hindsight.
In practice, the difficulties in reliably identifying bubbles or other persistent departures
———————————————————————————————————————————
16
Vickers (1999, p. 434) notes that, since the variance matters, ‘expected inflation somewhat under target
with moderate inflation uncertainty might be better than expected inflation on target with high inflation
uncertainty’.

17

from the ‘fundamentals’ are acute and the risks involved in such a strategy may be
considerable (Greenspan, 2002b).
In my view, the most persuasive argument against using interest rates to moderate
destabilising processes (even if they can be identified) is one of credibility and
transparency. It is hard enough to establish a credible reaction function based on clear
objectives with the interest rate being used to meet the inflation target and, consistent
with that, to offset shocks—including shocks from the endogenous processes of the
economy itself—as far as possible. If the interest rate has another role as well, being
used to moderate the shock structure (e.g. by heading off bubbles from time to time), the
reaction function is far less rule-like and predictable, and the system is likely to be less
transparent and accountable. There may be cases where interest rates should be used to
reverse some cumulative process. But the potential costs to credibility and transparency
weigh heavily against.
This puts me (nearly) in the baseline camp familiar from the policy rules literature that
the direct and indirect effects of asset prices on inflation should be taken into account, but
that otherwise they should not normally be given special significance. I am sure,
however, that the issue will continue to be the subject of research—and I do not regard it
as settled. I think, however, that there is a bit more to be said, and I come back to this
topic in my closing remarks.
B. Open economy issues and the exchange rate
The exchange rate can be treated as an asset price—so much of the above can be thought
to apply to exchange-rate misalignments as well (Cecchetti et al, 2002). However, the
UK context over the past decade illustrates the difficulties regarding ‘misalignments’ and
‘fundamentals’ rather well. In a nutshell, it is very hard to be at all sure what the
equilibrium rate for sterling actually is, especially, it may be added, when the dollar
versus the European currencies—since 1999, the euro—are swinging about as well.
Chart 3 shows the sterling real effective exchange rate (unit labour cost basis) and against
the US dollar and the DM (which, of course proxies the euro since 1999). Sterling
declined substantially on exit from the ERM in 1992, which was widely seen as a
reversion towards fundamental value. That hypothesis worked until about 1996, after
which it rose very substantially—in fact to levels well above those pertaining to the ERM
period—and, by and large, has stayed there since. Views about the ‘equilibrium’ have
changed (perhaps as a lagged response to movements—or, perhaps more accurately,
18

19

Chart 3.1: Sterling real effective exchange rate (unit labour cost based)
USD / £
150

140

130

120

110

100

90

1990Q1

1992Q1

1994Q1

1996Q1

1998Q1

2000Q1

80
2002Q1

Source: International Financial Statistics.

Chart 3.2: Sterling/US dollar nominal exchange rate
USD / £
2
1.9
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1990Q1

1992Q1

1994Q1

1996Q1

Source: IFS.

20

1998Q1

2000Q1

2002Q1

Chart 3.3: Sterling/DM nominal exchange rate
DM / £
3.4

3.2

3

2.8

2.6

2.4

2.2

1990Q1

1992Q1

1994Q1

1996Q1

1998Q1

2000Q1

2
2002Q1

Source: IFS.

non-movements—in the actual exchange rate), but there is very little in the way of good
explanation of the changes that have occurred, and the changes were not generally
predicted ex ante. What is more, predictions of reversion have proved false—so far.
What does one do, given that one of the chief transmission mechanisms from monetary
policy to the economy is (according, for example, to the Bank of England’s
macroeconomic forecasting model) through the exchange rate?
In fact, forecasts and assessments are based on ‘technical assumptions’. For a start, some
of the noise in exchange-rate movements is removed by basing the starting point of
forecasts on the average during a 15-day window.17 Second, forecasts are now made
using a simple average of the path predicted by Uncovered Interest Parity (UIP) and a nochange assumption (the random walk hypothesis). The possibility of reversion—
modelled as a probability each period of a step change downwards in the exchange rate—
has, however, been a feature of the risks and skews presented in the fan-charts published
———————————————————————————————————————————
17
From time to time a different ‘window’, such as five days, has been used if the 15-day window is judged
misleading.

21

in some recent Inflation Reports: per se this factor introduces an upward skew to the
inflation forecast. All in all, this illustrates the practical point that interest-rate policy
would be a great deal easier if we had better models of the exchange rate and a better
handle on the elusive concept of its longer-term equilibrium value.
The question of how interest-rate policy should react to the anticipation that there might
be a downward ‘correction’ of the exchange rate is not simple. Suppose that interest rates
are exactly right on the assumption that the exchange rate remains (over the forecast
horizon) where it is. Now impose an upward skew on anticipated inflation due the
anticipation that the exchange rate might fall. This suggests that interest rates should be
raised. But this risks prolonging the assumed overvaluation. A ‘bubble-pricking’
strategy would lean against the wind in the opposite direction, lowering interest rates in
the short term against the anticipation that they would have to be raised when and if this
caused the exchange rate to fall. All this raises the credibility issues referred to above—
and suggests that a strategy of reacting to large exchange-rate movements only when they
occur has considerable attractions.
Turning to the question of how policy should react to an exchange-rate change when it
does occur, the answer should depend, conventionally, on why it occurred and on the
model adopted (as well as, of course, on whether the change is expected to permanent or
transitory). That is not terribly helpful and not very transparent. And yet, contingent
policies are important in perceptions of the reaction function. The underlying question
also relates to the rules literature in terms of whether the rule should include a term in the
exchange rate (e.g. Ball, 1999) and in terms of what aggregate should be targeted. (Thus,
Clarida, Galí, and Gertler, 2001, for example, suggest targeting domestic-goods price
inflation, thereby excluding the import price component from the CPI, whereas Engel,
2002, suggests targeting the exchange rate.)
A natural way of approaching the issue is in terms of the procedures followed by the
MPC. In broad terms, it is clear that an exchange-rate depreciation (assumed persistent)
would feed through the Bank’s forecasting procedures to import prices and thence,
directly onto RPI inflation. The pass-through to import prices would lead (ignoring the
dynamics) to a step-change upward in the price level. There would be further effects on
aggregate demand—negatively in the short run because of the effect on real incomes and
positively from expenditure switching effects. There would also be potential wage and
price pressure as real wage falls were resisted and from effects on inflation expectations.
22

Thus, the prediction that an exchange rate fall would lead (other things being equal) to a
compensating rise in real interest rates appears pretty safe on the basis of the target
inflation rate set by the Chancellor and the known procedures of the MPC—including the
characteristics of the Bank’s forecasting model, which is published.
I have argued before (Allsopp, 2001) that, in the face of a real impact, such as the one
described, the ideal strategy for controlling inflation is to ‘accept’ the price-level effect,
whilst not accommodating the second-round effects via wage price pressure and via
effects on inflation expectations. (See also Balls, 2001, and Meyer, 2002, who take a
similar line for the UK and US respectively.) This is on the grounds that the ‘level effect’
is not really ‘inflation’. Such a view is in line with Meltzer (1977, p. 183), who argues:
‘a one-time change in tastes, the degree of monopoly, or other real variables changes the
price level… [W]e require a theory that distinguishes between once-and-for-all price
changes and maintained rates of price change.’ It is also in line with those who argue, on
New Keynesian grounds (with the assumption that price stickiness applies to
domestically produced goods) that monetary policy should not attempt to insulate the CPI
from short-run fluctuations arising from terms-of-trade movements (Clarida, Galí, and
Gertler, 2001). It needs to be recognised, however, that policy of allowing level effects,
whilst curtailing second-round effects, would be practically difficult and would require a
considerable degree of explanation and transparency if credibility were to be maintained.
But are the effects as assumed? Kara and Nelson (2002), in a paper to be presented at
this conference, demonstrate that the stylised facts for the UK are that, whilst there is
considerable evidence that exchange-rate pass-through to import prices, there is no
correlation with RPIX inflation. (There is much more in the paper—but they will speak
for themselves). If this is the case, then it throws doubt on whether there would be a
large effect on RPIX inflation from an exchange-rate fall, should it occur.
These questions of pass-through and of the appropriate design of policy in the face of
exchange-rate changes are of immense practical importance and are under continual
discussion. They are already being illuminated by what Taylor (2001, p. 263) has termed
the ‘new normative economic research’, and it is certain that the results of this ongoing
research will feed through to the practical implementation of policy.

23

C. Forecasting
Clearly, forecasts—interpreted generally to include the procedures and techniques that lie
behind forward-looking assessments of the economy—are a key part of an inflationtargeting regime. I want to make a few brief remarks about two aspects of a very large
subject. The first is about the consequences of non-stationarity—especially about the
consequences of possible ‘structural shifts’ in key parameters. A number of authors in
discussing policy rules have pointed to the large uncertainty about key parameters and
data moments, such as trend productivity, potential GDP growth (or, in the labour
market, the natural rate or NAIRU), and the neutral rate of interest. (See for example
Kohn, 1999). Moreover, there is an influential and developing literature which uses
policy rules to illuminate the consequences of (real time) errors of assessment in
explaining past policy mistakes (including notably Orphanides, 2000, on the US, and
Nelson and Nikolov, 2001, on the UK). The second is about procedure—how forecasting
models and forecasts enter into the policy making process.
Hendry and his co-authors have made the point (e.g. Hendry and Mizon, 2000) that if the
data generating process were stationary, one would not observe systematic forecast errors
(though poor models would, of course, generate inefficient forecasts). They trace
systematic forecast errors, which are observed, to ‘deterministic shifts’—i.e. shifts in the
unconditional means of key variables not accounted for by the existing forecasting
model. They make a number of points of practical policy importance. The first, as is
well known, is that these kinds of non-stationarities may justify ad hoc and informal
forecasting techniques, as well as practical procedures such as intercept adjustments and
over-differencing, which are certainly a major feature of real-world forecasting and
assessment exercises. A second is that the forecasting performance of a model may be a
poor and misleading criterion for selecting a policy model—and vice versa: that good
models for policy analysis may not be good forecasting models.
Any practical forecaster knows the potential importance of ‘deterministic shifts’. In an
important sense, there is little that can be done about them—since they are unforecastable
from within the model. If they do occur, forecasts will go wrong. There is, however, an
extremely important question about how quickly they are detected and how quickly they
are taken into account. In the MPC process, for example, a large proportion of the time is
typically spent on the question of whether new data should be treated as ‘noise’ or ‘news’
and, if the latter, what should be done about it. The response might be an intercept
24

adjustment, or, it might lead, over a longer time period, to the re-estimation of important
relationships, or even to the adoption of a new model as a forecasting/policy tool. This
means that when it comes to understanding the practice of monetary policy, one is not
concerned just with the process of forecasting and policy formation at a moment in time
but also with the ‘meta’ reaction function which describes how the institution adapts and
changes as information accrues, as mistakes are made, and as learning occurs—including
the embodiment of the results of new research as they accrue (Allsopp and Vines,
2000).18 As with other aspects of the ‘reaction function’, it is important that this aspect be
transparent, and as far as possible, publicly understood, as well.19
Forecasting errors have been an important reason for major policy errors in the past – for
example in the late 1980s in the UK,20 There is also a developing debate as to whether
over-optimistic or, for that matter, over-pessimistic assessments of productivity
performance have been a feature of US experience since the mid-1990s. An important
question, however, is whether a well-functioning system should operate to moderate the
effects of possible systematic forecasting errors. In principle it should.
The basic point is that, with a high frequency policy-making process, targeted on future
inflation, forecasting errors should reveal themselves, triggering appropriate reactions. In
the ordinary course of events this means that policy errors, due to poor data or forecast
mistakes, should not cumulate. A mistake made one month should not be repeated the
next—and, arguably, so long as the error is not great, does not matter very much. With
systematic errors, the process is more complicated and it is useful to illustrate what I have
in mind in the simple case of a shift in a parameter such as the equilibrium
unemployment rate. Suppose it has shifted down. Undetected, this leads to too high an
interest rate, and inflation should start to undershoot. If the same error is repeated,
systematic undershooting would be observed—whilst forecasts further out would
indicate, period by period, that the interest rate was appropriate. It would not lead,
however, to cumulatively expanding error—as might be expected on the basis of the misassessment of the equilibrium unemployment rate, as the starting-point is updated each
———————————————————————————————————————————
18
Though formal analysis of such learning processes is difficult, it is not really that much more difficult
conceptually than the process by which people learn to drive unfamiliar vehicles. But see Sargent (1999)
on US monetary policy and inflation.
19
Adrian Pagan is in the course of preparing a report on the processes and procedures of the MPC.
20
Hendry and Mizon (2000) ascribe this to a ‘deterministic shift’ applying to the models of the
consumption function then current. Of course, recognition of the problems may lead on to better models
which ‘explain’ the deterministic shifts—e.g. in terms of previously omitted variables. Over-optimistic
assessments of the productivity trend were another reason for policy error (Nelson and Nikolov, 2001).

25

month. Moreover, it should trigger responses, such as intercept adjustments and
reassessments of model properties, which should work to curtail and eliminate the
systematic error. The crucial point is that the forecasting system itself needs to react
quickly and appropriately to the signals provided by the economy. The authorities are
committed to an objective for inflation, not to a particular forecasting model or set of
procedures (Svensson, 2002).21
A potential difficulty is that the economy may not give good signals. It has been
suggested, on these grounds, that with successful policies of low inflation—leading to
rather flat Phillips curve responses—policy needs to react to other indicators, for example
to prospects for demand or unemployment (Begg et al., 2002) A low-inflation
environment with high inertia may also increase the likelihood of bubbles in asset prices
and other cumulative phenomena because, with the authorities focussed on inflation,
interest-rate responses appear unlikely to market participants.
It is clear that forecasting needs to be seen as a process and as one that adapts through
time. The role of forecasts in the policy process varies greatly between different systems.
In the US, a staff forecast and assessment is available to members of the FOMC and is
one input into the decision making process.22 In the UK, however, the MPC is
responsible for the Inflation Report and the forecasts. The process is iterative—or back
and forth (Vickers, 1998)—between Bank of England staff and the MPC. It is well
recognised that nine MPC members are unlikely to agree on prospects for inflation, yet
alone on the details, and they are intended to represent the centre of gravity of individual
views.23 The iterative and interactive process is widely regarded as an extremely
important part of the formation of policy in the UK. Clearly, though, it raises intricate
issues about the exact status of forecasts as well as other difficulties—issues detailed in a
report by Don Kohn of the Federal Reserve (now a member of the FOMC) (Kohn, 2000).

———————————————————————————————————————————
21
Svensson goes on to argue, more contentiously, that inflation-targeting frameworks entail (or should
entail) publicly-specified objective functions with explicit announcements of the functional form and
numerical weights in the functions.
22
One disadvantage of staff forecasts is that it is, in bureaucratic terms, difficult to make them public since
the policy-makers might be seen to be disagreeing with their own staff. In the US, the full forecasts are
published after five years.
23
The explanation at the beginning of the Inflation Report reads:
‘Although not every member will agree with every assumption on which are projections are based, the fan
charts represent the MPC’s best collective judgement about the most likely paths for inflation and output,
and the uncertainties surrounding those central projections.’

26

With an interactive process such as that in the UK the choice of models and procedures is
particularly important. (There is an ongoing programme of model development and a new
model with radically-improved theoretical structure is close to completion). But how
should models be chosen and what kinds of models should be used? In practical terms,
there may be a tension between theoretical sophistication and the needs of the interactive
process of forecasting and assessment - which can be seen as mirroring the point made
above that the best forecasting model may not be the best policy model—and vice versa.
D Interaction with other policies
The establishment of a monetary policy reaction function clearly does not mean that other
aspects of policy are unimportant in inflation control and in stabilisation. Quite the
contrary, it remains the overall stance of macroeconomic policy that matters. I
concentrate here on some obvious aspects of the interaction with fiscal policy.
First, it is now part of the consensus that there is not much hope of establishing a credible
monetary policy reaction function if fiscal policy is out of control—e.g., in the sense of
involving an explosive debt/GDP ratio. The Governor of the Bank of Canada argues, for
example, that, in Canada, the new monetary arrangements only started to work as
intended with major changes in the fiscal framework (Dodge, 2002). He also supports
the view that, in a single country with monetary and fiscal arrangements being designed
together, coordination difficulties should not arise—a view also put forward by the UK
Treasury (Balls and O’Donnell, 2001). None of this means, of course, that coordination
difficulties between monetary and fiscal policy-making institutions could not arise under
different circumstances—and it begs the question of what an appropriate fiscal
framework should look like.
I would argue that, in broad terms, there is, as for monetary policy, a developing
consensus over some aspects of fiscal policy. First, it is widely agreed that there needs to
be some fiscal closure rule or feedback device to rule out explosive debt/GDP trajectories
in the longer term—though the form that commitment should take is highly contentious,
as is illustrated by the debates over the Stability and Growth Pact in the EU (Allsopp,
2002). In the UK, the Medium Term Financial Strategy (MTFS) of the 1980s set out
targets for public borrowing intended to be ‘consistent’ with the objectives for the growth
in the £M3 monetary aggregate. The current fiscal framework, on the other hand,
involves the commitment that the debt/GDP ratio should be controlled at a sustainable
27

and prudent level, which is usually interpreted as a target for the debt ratio of less than
40%. Second, there is (in practical terms) agreement too that fiscal policy should have a
stabilisation role in the short term, usually involving the pragmatic compromise of
allowing the automatic stabilisers to work ‘over the cycle’; whilst discretionary fiscal
action is frowned upon—on the grounds that it has, in the past, frequently proved to be
destabilising. There are other aspects of fiscal policy that are important. For example,
forecasts often embody the assumption that public expenditure is cash-limited—i.e, set in
nominal terms—an institutional structure implying real expenditure reductions in the face
of upward price shocks.
Thus, whilst the ‘fiscal policy reaction function’, like the interest-rate reaction function,
combines longer-term commitment with a role in short-term macroeconomic
stabilisation, it remains, in policy discussions, a relatively underdeveloped concept. For
short-term forecasting and assessment, fiscal policy is, not surprisingly, normally treated
as an exogenous input.
Bean (1998b) has suggested that, in a system such as that in the UK, the fiscal authorities
are effectively in the position of a Stackelberg leader, free to set fiscal policy but
constrained by the monetary policy reaction function (which operates at high frequency
compared with fiscal policy). Formal coordination is not necessary so long as the
interest-rate reaction function is predictable. This means that fiscal policy cannot
generate surprise inflation and deals with a potential time-inconsistency problem. There
could however, be a coordination problem relating to the policy mix—if, for example, the
fiscal authorities saw advantage in a loose fiscal policy combined with higher interest
rates (and a higher exchange rate) than otherwise (Allsopp and Vines, 2000).
Clearly, the optimal monetary policy reaction function needs to take account of the fiscal
system in operation. For example, if automatic stabilisers are allowed to operate, and if
these help offset demand shocks, less work needs to be done by the monetary authorities.
Formal analysis of fiscal policy rules is also relatively underdeveloped compared with
that of monetary policy rules—reflecting the consensus referred to earlier that it is
monetary policy that that should be assigned to the twin aims of providing a nominal
anchor and stabilisation. It was, of course, not always so. Under the Bretton Woods
system, with monetary policy outside the US assigned to meeting the exchange rate
objectives, the stabilisation role was assigned to fiscal ‘fine-tuning’, which fell into

28

disrepute, partly because the evidence suggested, in the UK at least, that it was frequently
destabilising (Dow, 1964), and partly because the system failed to provide a nominal
anchor against rising inflation. Optimal fiscal policy is likely, however, to become an
increasing concern within countries who are members of EMU. It is interesting in this
respect that a recent Swedish report by a group of experts (Committee on Stabilisation
Policy, 2002), studying the implications of possible EMU entry, recommends giving a
substantial public role regarding stabilisation decisions to a fiscal policy council.24 The
arguments used draw heavily on the monetary policy rules literature. In principle (though
there may be strong objections in practice), fiscal instruments could be used to support a
non-accommodating policy against inflation as well.
All this suggests an important role for fiscal policy in stabilisation and inflation control.
Policy in the Lawson era in the UK was, in fact, often described as ‘as much fiscalist as
monetarist’. Does this give support to the so-called fiscal theory of the price level—the
subject of the Bennett McCallum’s extremely interesting paper for this conference? In
my view, it does not. The kind of model that would be used to discuss the interaction of
fiscal and monetary policies in a practical policy setting, should, I would argue, have the
following kinds of characteristics—as a sort of minimum kit for policy relevance. It
needs to have an overlapping-generations structure (starting from Samuelson and
Diamond rather than Ramsey), so that fiscal policy has potentially non-trivial effects in
the long run. In the short run, it would need to recognise the existence of liquidity or
cash flow effects—or, perhaps, rule-of-thumb behaviour as embodied in descendants of
the McKibbin/Sachs (1991) model. And it should embody an interest-rate reaction
function. In such a structure, there is no paradox at all in the existence of fiscal effects on
the price level. The paradox in the fiscal theory of the price level is not that prices
depend on fiscal policy, or even that the price level may follow the course of national
debt, but that this is combined with control of another quantity such as base money—
which, under the fiscal-theory hypothesis, does not determine prices.
V Concluding Remarks
I have argued that monetary policy in the UK has succeeded in setting up a reaction
function which is recognisably of the appropriate type. I have also suggested that the
new system should be reasonably robust, largely because its design reflects both the
lessons of history and some of the main insights from the policy rules literature.
———————————————————————————————————————————
24
For the UK, Wren-Lewis (2000) has suggested that policy could be improved in the UK if control over
some fiscal variables was assigned to the MPC.

29

Performance so far has been good—indeed, remarkable by historical standards.
However, though the system has survived some considerable shocks, there remains an
important sense in which it has not been tested in adversity. So far, the accent has been
on stabilisation. The MPC has not yet been called on to react to a major increase in
inflationary pressure, threatening the nominal anchor objective, which would involve
decisive and, presumably, unpopular action. Yet the perception that such action would be
taken, if necessary, is a crucial part of the system. The hope, of course, is that the
commitment to take such action if necessary makes it less likely that it will be necessary.
I have noted that, in normal times, the perceived reaction function should stabilise
expectations of both inflation and of growth. The confidence that policy will work in a
particular way alters the way the economy works (including perceptions of risk). To an
extent, ‘thinking makes it so’, and the private sector does much of the work via the effect
of the policy framework on expectations. A rather dramatic illustration of how the
system can function is provided by experience since the end of last year. After the
previous cuts, policy interest rates have remained completely unchanged this year in the
US, the euro area, and in the UK. Whilst this looks like central bank inertia of an
extreme kind, the anticipation of policy interest rate rises—which were strongly present
with the bounce in the US economy at the beginning of the year—has gone away
(especially following the large stock market falls across the world, though much of that
probably reflected the same re-evaluation of prospects). In the process, the yield curve
has shifted, and there has been a market-induced offsetting reaction, first to improving
and then to deteriorating prospects. Effectively, monetary policy has eased, despite no
change in policy rates. In my view, this shows a system that is alive and well, even
though actual policy decisions have resulted in no change in official rate settings. The
crucial point is that the private sector can anticipate stabilising policy reactions and, in
broad terms, believes they will work as intended.
The system requires a high degree of credibility or trust—which could be threatened from
several directions. Clearly, credibility would be threatened if the policy-makers were
seen to be likely to cheat. Equally, however, it would be threatened if policy-makers
were perceived to be incompetent, or to lack appropriate instruments. (This latter worry
is one of the reasons why the possibility of deflation with nominal interest rates reaching
their lower bound, as in Japan, is worrying.) The better the system functions and the
more public understanding of how it is supposed to function, the more credible it is likely
to become.

30

I have discussed a number of issues of current concern. One of these is asset prices. I
have subscribed to the ‘received wisdom’ that generally it is neither necessary nor
desirable for interest rates to respond to asset prices except to the extent that they
contribute to inflationary or deflationary pressures, but with the recognition that there
could be cases where diverting the interest-rate instrument to reducing particular kinds of
shocks could be justified on second-best cost benefit grounds if destabilising shocks can
thereby be reduced. Considerations of credibility—hard enough to establish anyway—
weigh heavily against such policies. A far better strategy would be to tackle the
destabilising dynamic processes, e.g. those involved in bubble-type phenomena, more
directly with other policies.
There is a worry, however, that the perception that economic policy will not react to
phenomena such as asset-price bubbles or exchange-rate misalignments might encourage
the phenomena themselves. This is most likely to be the case if there is a perceived
‘disconnect’ between the phenomena and prospects for growth and inflation—since then
the interest rate consequences implicit in the normal reaction function are, in effect,
shorted out, making destabilising cumulative processes the more likely. There are
historical instances, for example, where ‘benign neglect’ of the exchange rate (with the
concentration of policy on the domestic economy) has appeared to lead to exchange-rate
misalignments and instability. This is not to argue for giving a special role to asset prices
in inflation targeting, still less should it be seen as an argument for altering the target. It
should serve, however, to reinforce the point that the successful establishment of an
inflation-targeting regime does not mean that all macroeconomic policy problems are
dealt with. On the contrary, it is likely to highlight other aspects of the overall policy
regime.
This is particularly true with fiscal policy. There is consensus that a credible monetary
policy requires a credible fiscal framework to go with it. So far, however, research on
fiscal policy reaction functions seems relatively underdeveloped.
Finally, if I were asked what would make the most difference to the procedures of
practical monetary policy-making, it would be better and more reliable data and better
understanding of key economic relationships. Given the uncertainties, the process of
assessment and forecasting is bound to be judgemental—and in that sense, not rule-like.
But if the goals are clear and the process is open and transparent, it is, to a large extent
predictable, which is what matters for the stabilisation of expectations.

31

References
Alesina, Alberto, Olivier Blanchard, Jordi Galí, Francesco Giavazzi, and Harald Uhlig
(2001). ‘Defining a Macroeconomic Framework for the Euro Area’, Monitoring the
European Central Bank 3, CEPR.
Allsopp, Christopher (2001). ‘Economic Imbalances and UK Monetary Policy’, Bank of
England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 41(3), 484-494.
Allsopp, Christopher (2002). ‘The Future of Macroeconomic Policy in the European
Union’. External MPC Unit Discussion Paper No. 7.
Allsopp, Christopher, and David Vines (2000). ‘The Assessment: Macroeconomic
Policy’, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, Vol. 16(4), 1-32.
Ball, Laurence (1999). ‘Policy Rules for Open Economies’. In J.B. Taylor (ed.),
Monetary Policy Rules. University of Chicago Press. 127–144.
Balls, Edward (2001). ‘Delivering Economic Stability’. Oxford Business Alumni
Annual Lecture, Merchant Taylors’ Hall, London. 12 June.
Balls, Edward, and Gus O’Donnell (eds.) (2001). Reforming Britain’s Economic and
Financial Policy. Palgrave.
Batini, Nicoletta, and Andrew G. Haldane (1999). ‘Forward-Looking Rules for
Monetary Policy’. In J.B. Taylor (ed.), Monetary Policy Rules. University of Chicago
Press. 157-192.
Bean, Charles (1998a). ‘The New UK Monetary Arrangements: A View from the
Literature’, Economic Journal, Vol. 108(451), 1795-1809.
Bean, Charles (1998b). ‘Monetary Policy under EMU’, Oxford Review of Economic
Policy, Vol. 14(3), 41-53.
Bean, Charles, and Nigel Jenkinson (2001). ‘The Formulation of Monetary Policy at the
Bank of England’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 41(4), Winter, 434-441.
32

Begg, David, Fabio Canova, Antonio Fatas, Paul De Grauwe, and Philip R. Lane (2002).
‘Surviving the Slowdown’, Monitoring the European Central Bank 4, CEPR, London.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler (1999). ‘Monetary Policy and Asset Price
Volatility’. In New Challenges for Monetary Policy: A Symposium Sponsored by the
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 77-128.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Frederic S. Mishkin (1997). ‘Inflation Targeting: A New
Framework for Monetary Policy?’, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 11(2), 97-116.
Blinder, Alan S. (1998). Central Banking in Theory and Practice. MIT Press.
Bordo, Michael D., and Olivier Jeanne (2002). ‘Boom-Busts in Asset Prices, Economic
Instability and Monetary Policy’. CEPR Discussion Paper No. 3398.
Borio, Claudio, and Philip Lowe (2002). ‘Asset Prices, Financial and Monetary Stability:
Exploring the Nexus’. BIS Working Paper No. 114.
Cagan, Philip (1956). ‘The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinflation’. In M. Friedman
(ed.), Studies in the Quantity Theory of Money. University of Chicago Press. 25-117.
Cecchetti, Stephen G. (2000). ‘Making Monetary Policy: Objectives and Rules’, Oxford
Review of Economic Policy, Vol. 16(4), 43-59.
Cecchetti, Stephen G., Hans Genberg, John Lipsky, and Sushil Wadhwani (2000). Asset
Prices and Central Bank Policy. Geneva Report on the World Economy 2. CEPR and
ICMB.
Cecchetti, Stephen G., Hans Genberg, and Sushil Wadhwani (2002). ‘Asset Prices in a
Flexible Inflation Targeting Framework’. NBER Working Paper No. 8970.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (1998). ‘Monetary Policy Rules in
Practice: Some International Evidence’, European Economic Review, 42, 1033–1067.

33

Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2001). ‘Optimal Monetary Policy in
Open versus Closed Economies: An Integrated Approach’, American Economic Review
(Papers and Proceedings), Vol. 91(2), 248–252.
Committee on Stabilisation Policy (2002). Stabilisation Policy in the Monetary Union.
Swedish Official Government Report, 12 March.
Dodge, David (2002). ‘The Interaction between Monetary and Fiscal Policies’. Donald
Gow Lecture, School of Policy Studies, Queens University, Kingston, Ontario, 26 April.
Dornbusch, Rudiger (1999). ‘Commentary: Monetary Policy and Asset Price Volatility’.
In New Challenges for Monetary Policy: A Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 129-135.
Dow, J.C.R. (1964). The Management of the British Economy, 1945-1960. Cambridge
University Press.
Engel, Charles (2002). ‘The Responsiveness of Consumer Prices to Exchange Rates and
the Implications for Exchange-Rate Policy: A Survey of a Few Recent New OpenEconomy Macro Models’. NBER Working Paper No. 8725.
Friedman, Milton (1967). ‘The Monetary Theory and Policy of Henry Simons’, Journal
of Law and Economics, Vol. 10(2), 1-13. Reprinted in M. Friedman, The Optimum
Quantity of Money and Other Essays. Aldine, 1969. 81-96.
Friedman, Milton (1968). ‘The Role of Monetary Policy’, American Economic Review,
Vol. 58(1), 1-17.
Greenspan, Alan (2002a). ‘Chairman’s Remarks: Transparency in Monetary Policy’,
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, Vol. 84(4), 5-6.
Greenspan, Alan (2002b). ‘Economic Volatility’. Speech given at the Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City Symposium on ‘Rethinking Stabilization Policy’, Jackson Hole,
Wyoming. 30 August.
Hendry,-David-F., and Grayham E. Mizon (2000). ‘Reformulating Empirical
Macroeconomic Modelling’, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, Vol. 16(4), 138-159.

34

Hicks, John R. (1967). Critical Essays in Monetary Theory. Clarendon Press.
HM Treasury (2002). Budget 2002. Stationery Office.
Kara, Amit, and Edward Nelson (2002). ‘The Exchange Rate and Inflation in the UK’.
Manuscript, Bank of England.
Keynes, J.M. (1936). The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money.
Macmillan.
King, Mervyn (1996). ‘How Should Central Banks Reduce Inflation?—Conceptual
Issues’. In Achieving Price Stability: A Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 53-91.
King, Mervyn (1997a). ‘The Inflation Target Five Years On’, Bank of England
Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 37(4), November, 434-442.
King, Mervyn (1997b). ‘Changes in UK Monetary Policy: Rules and Discretion in
Practice’, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 39(1), 81-97.
King, Mervyn (2002). ‘The Monetary Policy Committee Five Years On’, Bank of
England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 42(2), Summer, 219-227.
Kohn, Donald L. (1999). ‘Comment: Forward-Looking Rules for Monetary Policy’. In
J.B. Taylor (ed.), Monetary Policy Rules. University of Chicago Press. 192-199.
Kohn, Donald L. (2000). ‘Report to the Non-Executive Directors of the Court of the
Bank of England on Monetary Policy Processes and the Work of Monetary Analysis’. 18
October. Reprinted in Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 41(1), Spring 2001,
35-49.
Krugman, Paul (2002). ‘Passing the Buck’, New York Times, 3 September.
Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott (1977). ‘Rules Rather than Discretion: The
Inconsistency of Optimal Plans’, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 85(3), 473-491.
Lawson, Nigel (1992). The View from No. 11. Bantam.

35

McCallum, Bennett T. (1995). ‘Two Fallacies Concerning Central-Bank Independence’,
American Economic Review, Vol. 85(2), 207-211.
McKibbin, Warwick J., and Jeffrey D. Sachs (1991). Global Linkages: Macroeconomic
Interdependence and Cooperation in the World Economy. Brookings Institution Press.
Meade, James E. (1951). The Theory of International Economic Policy, Volume 1: The
Balance of Payments. Oxford University Press.
Meltzer, Allan H. (1977). ‘Anticipated Inflation and Unanticipated Price Change’,
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking Vol. 9(1), 182–205.
Meyer, Laurence H. (2002). ‘Rules and Discretion’. Speech at the Owen Graduate
School of Management, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee. January 16.
Nelson, Edward, and Kalin Nikolov (2001). ‘UK Inflation in the 1970s and 1980s: The
Role of Output Gap Mismeasurement’. Bank of England Working Paper No. 148 and
CEPR Discussion Paper No. 2999.
Orphanides, Athanasios (2000). ‘The Quest for Prosperity without Inflation’. ECB
Working Paper No. 15.
Patinkin, Don (1969). ‘The Chicago Tradition, the Quantity Theory, and Friedman’,
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Vol. 1(1), 46-70.
Posen, Adam S. (1993). ‘Why Central Bank Independence Does Not Cause Low
Inflation: There Is No Institutional Fix for Politics’. In R. O’Brien (ed.), Finance and the
International Economy. Volume 7. The Amex Bank Review Prize Essays: In Memory of
Richard Marjolin. Oxford University Press. 41-54.
Rogoff, Kenneth (1985). ‘The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate
Monetary Target’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 100(4), 1169-1189.
Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford (1997). ‘An Optimization-Based
Econometric Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy’, NBER Macroeconomics
Annual 12, 297-346.
Sargent, Thomas J (1999). The Conquest of American Inflation. Princeton University
Press.

36

Simons, Henry C. (1948). Economic Policy for a Free Society. University of Chicago
Press.
Svensson, Lars E.O. (1997). ‘Inflation Forecast Targeting: Implementing and Monitoring
Inflation Targets’, European Economic Review, Vol. 41(6), 1111-1146.
Svensson, Lars E.O. (2002). ‘What Is Wrong with Taylor Rules? Using Judgment in
Monetary Policy through Targeting Rules’. Manuscript, Princeton University.
Taylor, John B. (1993). ‘Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice’, Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 39(1), 195-214.
Taylor, John B. (1997). ‘America’s Peacetime Inflation: The 1970s: Comment’. In C.D.
Romer and D.H. Romer (eds.), Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy. University
of Chicago Press. 276-280.
Taylor, John B. (1999). ‘The Robustness and Efficiency of Monetary Policy Rules as
Guidelines for Interest Rate Setting by the European Central Bank’, Journal of Monetary
Economics, Vol. 43(3), 655-679.
Taylor, John B. (2000). ‘Alternative Views of the Monetary Transmission Mechanism:
What Difference Do They Make for Monetary Policy?’, Oxford Review of Economic
Policy, Vol. 16(4), 60-73.
Taylor, John B. (2001). ‘The Role of the Exchange Rate in Monetary-Policy Rules’,
American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings), Vol. 91(2), 263-267.
Vickers, John (1998). ‘Inflation Targeting in Practice: The UK Experience’, Bank of
England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 38(4), November, 368-375.
Vickers, John (1999). ‘Monetary Policy and Asset Prices’, Bank of England Quarterly
Bulletin, Vol. 39(4), November, 428-435.
Walsh, Carl E. (1995). ‘Optimal Contracts for Central Bankers’, American Economic
Review, Vol. 85(1), 150-167.
Wren-Lewis, Simon (2000). ‘The Limits to Discretionary Fiscal Stabilization Policy’,
Oxford Review of Economic Policy, Vol. 16(4), 92-105.

37

