Macro, Asset Price and Financial System Uncertainties
Roy Bridge Memorial Lecture given by
Paul Tucker, Executive Director for Markets and Monetary Policy Committee member,
Bank of England

11 December 2006

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

122

Quarterly Bulletin 2007 Q1

Macro, asset price, and financial
system uncertainties
In this lecture,(1) Paul Tucker,(2) Executive Director for Markets and Monetary Policy Committee
member, discusses three related ‘arenas’ of uncertainty concerning the impact of structural changes
in the economy and financial system. Beginning with the macroeconomy and against the
background of his vote at the Monetary Policy Committee’s November meeting, he looks at the
challenges confronting policymakers from supply-side changes in the United Kingdom such as
migration and globalisation, and stresses that the response of policymakers depends crucially on
whether medium-term inflation expectations are well anchored. After exploring possible
explanations for the volatility of financial-asset returns having fallen by rather less than
macroeconomic volatility, he considers the limited degree of forward-looking uncertainty about
asset prices implied by financial option prices. Noting that part of the explanation may lie in
developments in the structure of the financial system, and in particular the process of
disintermediation of the banking system, he examines the implications for assessments of money
and credit conditions and of the resilience of the financial system as a whole. Bringing those
uncertainties together raises questions about how markets and the system would respond if some
of the risks to the outlook were to crystallise. Though the answers are unknowable, he emphasises
that central bankers must strive to maintain the medium-term credibility of monetary policy; and
must understand today’s global banking system and capital markets well enough to tell the
difference between a problem requiring solely a macroeconomic response and a more complex
financial stability problem.
It is a great privilege to give this lecture, named in honour of
Roy Bridge, for many years a very distinguished head of foreign
exchange at the Bank of England and the first President of your
association, the ACI.
The world in which Bridge worked was so very different from
ours that, although my responsibilities cover the same part of
the Bank, I cannot really imagine what he would have made of
three striking features of the current environment which I plan
to review this evening.
First, while monetary authorities are commonly given some of
the credit for the return of macroeconomic stability, central
bankers themselves devote a great deal of effort to conveying
what they see as risks to the outlook. Second, while some
distinguished commentators see a puzzle in lower macro
volatility not having been matched by an equally large decline
in asset price volatility, central bankers by contrast worry
publicly that many financial asset prices imply unusually low
future volatility. And third, while central bankers and others in
the official sector celebrate the gains in risk transfer and

efficiency brought by recent changes in the structure of the
financial system, they also issue warnings about associated
threats to systemic stability.
These three arenas of uncertainty — macroeconomic, financial
asset pricing, and the financial system — are of course
intertwined, but I shall initially find it convenient to unbundle
them.

(1) Given at the Roy Bridge Memorial Lecture delivered on 11 December 2006 at the ACI
— Financial Markets Association Annual Conference, Honorary Royal Artillery
Company, London. This speech can be found on the Bank’s website at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2006/speech294.pdf.
(2) I am grateful to Thomas Belsham, Nicholas Vause, Lewis Webber and Jing Yang in the
Financial Stability area; Matt Davies, Alex Haberis, Ben May, Kalin Nikolov,
Rupert de Vincent-Humphries and Tony Yates in the Monetary Analysis and Statistics
area; and James Lindley, Philip Thomas and James Wackett in the Markets area. For
background work to Damien Lynch, and for secretarial support to
Katherine Bradbrook.

Speeches Macro, asset price, and financial system uncertainties

Macroeconomic and monetary policy
uncertainties
The characteristics of the Great Stability, as some economists
call it,(1) are by now familiar. Essentially, low inflation on
average; much less persistence in deviations of inflation from
central banks’ explicit or implicit targets; and much lower
volatility in both output growth and inflation.(2) Some of the
credit is typically given to better monetary regimes, and I
believe it should be.
Yet policymakers also stress a wide range of uncertainties,
threatening at least interruptions to the benign conditions of
the past decade or so. This is not just an occupational
disposition of central bankers. To varying degrees, these
uncertainties do feature in real-world policy debates. I have
argued previously(3) that some risks — such as those posed by
global current account imbalances — could not sensibly be
factored in to policy settings ahead of their crystallising. But
uncertainties about the structure of the economy and how
monetary policy works do somehow have to feature in our
policy judgements, as I can illustrate with the thinking behind
my vote at the MPC’s November meeting.(4) Essentially, I
balanced two quite different, but quite likely, views of the
outlook, which I shall label Orthodox and Alternative.
Under both stories, private sector demand growth has been
reasonably robust and looks, according to surveys and the
Bank’s regional Agents, to continue to be robust for a little
while at least. Notwithstanding the US slowdown, world
growth weighted for its significance to UK trade has
remained solid, due largely to recovery in the euro area.
Business investment appears to be recovering. And
consumption, although in the near term subject to upside
risks from the housing market but downside risks from
household debt, looks most likely to grow close to its average
rate. Surveys and anecdotal information point to firms
operating close to capacity, but profit margins have been
squeezed in recent years, essentially by the rise in energy
prices. There is some slack in the labour market. That is
deliberately broad brush; the point is that it is common to
both stories.
On the Orthodox Story, in conditions of robust aggregate
demand, firms operating close to capacity are likely to take
opportunities to restore their margins by raising prices,
pushing upwards on CPI inflation. So the Orthodox Story
commanded a policy response to prospective inflationary
pressures from excess demand.
Under the Alternative Story, the outlook for inflation may be
quite different due to developments in the labour market,
notably from inward migration. There might well be more
slack in the labour market than allowed for in the Orthodox

123

Story. And, most potently, if more workers were to be
attracted in to the country as aggregate demand expands, the
economy’s productive capacity would expand as well. In that
case, it would probably be harder for firms to raise prices,
although they may still be able to restore margins by bearing
down on costs, especially labour costs. (That is in aggregate;
we would probably see further increases in skill shortages and
in the premium for highly skilled labour in the professions.)
On the Alternative Story, the outlook for inflation is highly
uncertain — and not necessarily weaker, although that may
seem the most obvious implication.
Indeed, under the Alternative Story, there could well be
challenges for monetary policy, which in its modern mode
operates essentially by using Bank Rate to regulate aggregate
demand relative to aggregate supply, exploiting a short-run
trade-off between growth and inflation so long as inflation
expectations are well anchored. If aggregate supply were to
become endogenous in the way I have described, the short-run
trade-off might well be less pronounced for a while. That
would make it harder to judge inflationary pressures from
gauging the amount of slack in the economy; and harder for
the Bank to achieve our 2% inflation target by broadly steering
demand conditions. In that scenario, it would matter
enormously that wage and price-setters continued to act on
the basis that CPI inflation would remain in line with the 2%
target over the medium term.
For me, both the Orthodox and Alternative Stories are
plausible. In that sense, I think the outlook is ‘bimodal’ — in
terms of there being two main stories. The Orthodox Story, to
which I gave most weight in my November vote, required a
small tightening. The implications of the Alternative Story for
policy were less clear. I concluded that it was essential for the
MPC to act in a way that was most likely to keep inflation
expectations anchored. With headline inflation tangibly above
target in the run-up to the main, New Year wage-bargaining
season and with the market clearly expecting that policy
would be tightened, a small increase in Bank Rate was, on
balance, warranted to avoid any misperception that our
reaction function had altered.
Strategically, the significance of this account is in the
uncertainty injected by structural change; in this case, from
migration. Of course, there is a host of demand-side
uncertainties: about consumption, export growth and so on.
(1) In the United States, ‘Great moderation’ is preferred, because low inflation had been
achieved in an earlier decade. Bernanke, B (2004), ‘The great moderation’, remarks at
the meetings of the Eastern Economic Association, Washington, 2004.
(2) See Benati, L (2005), ‘The inflation-targeting framework from an historical
perspective’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Summer, pages 160–68; and
Tucker, P (2005), ‘Monetary policy, stability and structural change’, Bank of England
Quarterly Bulletin, Summer, pages 247–55.
(3) Tucker, P (2006), ‘Reflections on operating inflation targeting’, Bank of England
Quarterly Bulletin, Summer, pages 212–24.
(4) This lecture is being given before publication of the minutes of the Committee’s
December meeting, and so I am not at liberty to discuss my contributions to that
meeting.

124

Quarterly Bulletin 2007 Q1

Table A Macroeconomic and asset price annual volatility(a)

1951–59

1960–69

UK GDP

1.5

US GDP

3.3

Percentage change
between 1960–69
and 1992–2005

Percentage change
between 1980–91
and 1992–2005

1970–79

1980–91

1992–2005

2002–05

1.6

2.2

2.3

0.9

0.7

-41.6

-59

1.7

2.5

2.5

1.1

1.0

-36.4

-56

1.5

5.5

3.4

1.0

0.4

-34

-72

1.2

2.0

2.3

0.5

0.6

-55

-76

15.7

19.1

12.0

15.2

14.3

-3

27

20.4

43.3

12.1

15.2

21.2

-25

26

5.4

7.8

15.4

9.6

6.9

78

-38

3.1

11.2

7.7

4.9

3.5

57

6.9

4.5

2.3

1.0

-49

Dollar exchange rate index(f)

5.4

4.4

2.9

3.3

-34

Yen exchange rate index(f)

9.9

4.3

4.0

2.0

-8

Euro exchange rate index(f)

1.8

3.0

3.0

1.8

-3

UK inflation(b)
US inflation

1.8

S&P 500(c)

14.0

FTSE All-Share(c)(d)
Ten-year US Treasury bond(c)(g)
Ten-year UK gilt(c)(e)(g)
Sterling exchange rate index(f)

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)

3.4

-36

Volatility is calculated as standard deviation of annual growth rates.
UK inflation is consumption deflator inflation. Data for 1960–69 includes data for 1956–59.
Nominal returns deflated by consumption deflators.
FTSE All-Share starts in 1962.
1960–69 includes 1956–59.
Trade-weighted real exchange rate indices start in 1975.
UST and UK gilts are based on total return indices from Global Financial Database.

But they fit comfortably into the MPC’s framework of
producing a conditional forecast of probability ranges around a
central projection. The supply-side uncertainties are
something else — much harder to calibrate and potentially
going to how we read and act on the economy.
Inward migration is just the most obvious reason the monetary
transmission mechanism might have altered. In reviewing
globalisation more generally, others have described how the
short-run relationship between aggregate demand and
inflation may be weakened by firms’ enhanced capacity to
switch production between countries, including via
outsourcing, in the face of capacity and cost pressures.
As policymakers discuss these issues(1) it could become a
commonplace that, in such an environment, central banks
would have no choice but to respond more aggressively
whenever inflation deviates from target; that, compared with
the past, we would need to make bigger changes in interest
rates, since bigger shifts in demand would be needed to bring
inflation back to target. I should make clear that, as put, I
would not go along with this completely. It would all depend
on whether medium-term inflation expectations were well
anchored. So long as they were, the central bank would have a
wider choice than a one-item menu of having, putting it
crudely, to generate a material downturn in the short term to
contain inflation; or, symmetrically, a boomlet to raise
inflation. Another possible choice might be to tighten (loosen)
modestly but for longer, allowing inflation to return to target
over a longer horizon; and if the policymaker explained the
considerations behind the likely path of policy, price and
wage-setters might act in a way that helped to bring inflation
back to target.(2) Acting aggressively without need could
endanger the political economy foundations of any central

bank’s authority. It has to be a judgement based on the
particular circumstances.
In terms of my central theme this evening, this is a world in
which monetary regimes truly are better, but in which
policymakers are having to face some fresh challenges.

Asset pricing uncertainties
If central bankers see possible interruptions to the
Great Stability, there is arguably conflicting evidence as to
whether financial markets are giving it insufficient weight or —
at the opposite pole — taking stability for granted.
In an intriguing paper, Ken Rogoff has shown that output and
inflation volatility have declined by considerably more over
recent decades than the volatility of returns on a range of
financial assets (Table A).(3) As Rogoff discusses, there could
be a number of explanations. Financial markets might believe
that the Great Stability will not last. Or it may be taking them
a while to price in lower macroeconomic volatility. Or the
beneficial effects of macroeconomic stability may be being
offset by something else.
In the third category, Rogoff discusses the possibility that, with
the lower level of risk-free rates that have accompanied the
Great Stability, a given change in the yield curve now has a
(1) For example, Bean, C (2006), ‘Globalisation and inflation’, Bank of England
Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 46, No. 4, pages 468–75.
(2) See Woodford, M (2003), Interest and prices: foundations of a theory of monetary
policy, Princeton University Press, Chapter 7; Tucker, P (2006), ‘Reflections on
operating inflation targeting’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Summer,
pages 212–24.
(3) Rogoff, K (2006), ‘Impact of globalization on monetary policy’, paper prepared for a
symposium on ‘The New Economic Geography: effects and policy implications’,
Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August.

Speeches Macro, asset price, and financial system uncertainties

bigger proportionate effect on asset prices. I am not sure this
would be my own best bet.

125

discount rate were broadly unchanged, a given shift in the
default-free curve would not necessarily have a greater
proportionate effect on equity prices than in past decades.

Common versus idiosyncratic volatility
But first, some facts. In the case of equity markets, we need
to separate the dominant common (or macro) component of
index returns from that attributable to variability in the
firm-specific (or idiosyncratic) component. Comparing the
period from 1980 to 1992 with that since 1992, when inflation
targeting was introduced in the United Kingdom, the
common component — proxied by the average correlation
between returns on pairs of equity index components — has
fallen by around 25%(1) (Chart 1). Forward-looking measures,
derived from option prices, imply that these pairwise
correlations are not expected to fall much further. All told,
this seems consistent with some beneficial effect on asset
volatility from the Great Stability, but with Rogoff’s puzzle
intact.

Chart 2 DDM sensitivity of S&P 500 to a 1 percentage
point increase in the risk-free real interest rate
Per cent change in S&P 500

-25

-30
Average
-35

-40

-45

1991

Chart 1 Average pairwise correlation between historical
returns of FTSE 100 constituents
1.0

0.8

Average
(1992–2006)

0.6

0.4

0.2
Average
(1984–91)
Jan.
1984

June
89

Dec.
94

June
2000

Nov.
05

0.0

Source: Bank of England calculations.

Possible explanations: risk premia
Another vantage point can be gained from decomposing
changes in the level of the equity market into changes in
(estimates of) the risk-free rate, projected earnings growth,
and the equity risk premium.(2) For both the FTSE 100 and the
S&P, this suggests that the decline in real rates has been an
important driver of the rise in the equity market since the early
1990s. But one feature of better monetary policy regimes has
been that short-term risk-free real rates have been slightly less
volatile than in the past, so it is not obvious that equity
volatility would otherwise have remained higher than
macroeconomic volatility due to fluctuations in risk-free real
rates. Separately, such a decomposition suggests that the
market is not materially more sensitive to changes in real rates
now than it was on average over the past 15–20 years
(Chart 2). One possible explanation is that the other
component of the discount rate — the equity risk premium —
may have risen since the late 1990s. If, as a result, the overall

-20

Fixed, exogeneous real dividend growth rate of 3.2%

94

97

2000

03

06

-50

Source: Bank of England calculations.

Indeed, a bigger question would seem to be how to square the
possibility of a rise in the equity risk premium with apparent
falls, since the turn of the century, in term premia on
default-free government bond yields and in credit risk premia
across a wide range of assets. It must be cautioned that the
true equity risk premium is unobservable, and so estimates
may well be wide of the mark. But there is a possible story,
related to changes in the global distribution and management
of savings. The managers of the now massive official foreign
exchange reserves in Asia have a clear preference for
fixed-income securities, both absolutely and relative to say the
US household sector. And in the West, defined-benefit
pension fund trustees and managers have been placing greater
weight on matching the duration of their quasi-fixed income
liabilities with holdings of bonds. In both cases, there may
have been a de facto shift in global demand from equities to
fixed-income securities of various kinds. That would tend to
alter relative risk premia.(3)

(1) As for the volatility in individual-firm equity returns, some extreme episodes aside (for
example, the 1987 Crash), the firm-specific component inevitably dominates. For the
UK market, the common component seems to have fallen slightly, on average, since
1992. The idiosyncratic component rose during the second half of the 1990s, but then
fell back. On the face of it, that would seem to square with the dotcom/telecom
boom and bust. At least for the UK market, it does not obviously lend support to the
suggestion in some earlier papers that there may have been an underlying increase in
idiosyncratic volatility. For example, see Campbell, J, Lettau, M, Malkiel, B and Xu, Y
(2001), ‘Have individual stocks become more volatile? An empirical exploration of
idiosyncratic risk’, Journal of Finance, Vol. 56, No. 1 pages 1–43, which covered the
period from 1962 to 1996 for the US market.
(2) Using a dividend discount model. Further information on the dividend discount
model can be found in Panigirtzoglou, N and Scammell, R (2002), ‘Analysts’ earnings
forecasts and equity valuations’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Spring,
pages 59–66.
(3) This is a different point from that, advocated for example by Chairman Bernanke,
explaining a fall in long-maturity risk-free rates in terms of an ex-ante imbalance of
global savings and investment. The two explanations are not mutually exclusive, as
the observed fall in yields on indexed government bonds could reflect a combination
of a fall in the risk-free rate and falls in term premia.

126

Quarterly Bulletin 2007 Q1

All told, this seems to reduce the candidate explanations for
Rogoff’s puzzle. For equities, fluctuations in equity risk premia
may have been a factor, driven by the dotcom/telecom fad and
shifts in global investor preferences. For financial assets more
generally, perhaps the best provisional view is that volatility in
asset returns may have been elevated for a while by the effect
on prices of the reductions in default-free rates, term premia
and credit risk premia associated with the Great Stability. As
well as adding to volatility temporarily, that will also have
raised ex-post returns, in which case it would be important
that market participants did not act on the basis that they
were easily sustainable.

worrying about greater-than-one standard deviation events.
The market’s assessment of such risks can perhaps be gauged
by looking at how much of the current option-implied
distributions lie beyond one sd compared with option markets
in the past, and with historical outturns.

Forward-looking uncertainty
This is where my own second puzzle kicks in: while we can
busy ourselves trying to identify why realised asset price
volatility has not fallen more over the past decade, central
bankers seem to expend quite a lot more energy worrying
about the low level of future volatility implied by options on a
range of financial assets.
So, on the one hand, members of my community variously
enumerate risks from low risk premia and the search for yield;
global imbalances; energy prices; household balance sheets
and house prices in a number of countries; releveraging of the
corporate sector via leveraged buyouts; flatter Phillips curves;
and so on.(1) On the other hand, implied volatilities derived
from options, with a range of expiry dates, on long-term yields,
equities, and exchange rates are all well below levels around
the turn of the century (Chart 3). And in recent months, at
least for short expiry options, they have dipped below the
averages for the first part of the 1990s.

For bonds and equities, a little bit more of the probability mass
implied by options(2) is currently in the lower tail (beyond one
standard deviation) than is the case over fairly long runs of
historical outturns(3) (Table B). But for equities, bonds, and
dollar exchange rates, the lower probability mass is pretty well
in line with the average ‘tail’ implied by options markets in the
past (Charts 4 and 5). That does not suggest much sensitivity
to the various risks preoccupying the official sector.
Table B Probability masses in financial asset option-implied and
historical distributions
Option-implied
tail

Historical
tail

Historical
period

Asset

Tail

USD per GBP

Upper ($ negative)

15

16

1971–2006

JPY per USD

Lower ($ negative)

15

16

1971–2006

USD per EUR

Upper ($ negative)

15

14

1971–2006

S&P 500

Lower

15

11

1931–2006

Ten-year UST

Lower (ten-year
yield negative)

15

10

1960–2006

Chart 4 S&P 500 returns: probability in lower implied
pdf tail more than one standard deviation from the mean
(three-month horizon)
Per cent

18.0

17.5

17.0

Chart 3 Equity index three-month option-implied
volatility
Per cent

Average

16.5

80
16.0

S&P 500

15.5

60
FTSE 100
40

1985

90

95

2000

05

15.0
0.0

Source: Bank of England calculations.

20

0
1983 85

87

89

91

93

95

97

99

2001 03

05

Source: Bank of England calculations.

But implied volatilities may not be the best measure of the
market’s forward-looking assessment of risks. They represent
one standard deviation (sd) in the market’s underlying
probability distribution, whereas arguably central bankers are

Market contacts offer various explanations for this — some of
them, I should make clear, sceptically. One — and here bear in
mind my earlier remarks — is that not much really nasty will
happen given the collective wisdom of the world’s monetary
authorities. Another is that, in an environment where
investors are chasing yield, collecting the premium income
(1) For example see Bank of England Financial Stability Report, Overview, July 2006,
pages 5–13 and Inflation Report, November 2006, Section 5.
(2) Using three-month expiry options.
(3) Since the 1930s for equities; 1960s for bonds; and 1970s for exchange rates.

Speeches Macro, asset price, and financial system uncertainties

from writing options has become a prevalent way of sustaining
returns in the hope that nothing too bad happens; and that if
it does, today’s liquid capital markets will contain the volatility
anyway. In other words, they base their explanation for low
option-implied volatility on what has been going on in the
structure of the financial system.

tend to boost aggregate demand and so add to inflationary
pressures.
Chart 6 Broad money across industrialised countries
Percentage changes on a year earlier

United Kingdom

Chart 5 JPYUSD: probability in lower implied pdf tail
more than one standard deviation from the mean
(three-month horizon)
Per cent

16.0

127

16
14
12

Euro area

10
8

United States

6
15.5
Japan

4

Downside risk for dollar
15.0

14.5

Average

2
0
1996

97

98

99 2000

01

02

03

04

05 06

Source: Bank of England calculations.

14.0

13.5

2001

02

03

04

05

06

13.0
0.0

Source: Bank of England calculations.

Financial system uncertainties
Big, perhaps fundamental, changes have been under way in
banking and capital markets for a few years now, with
implications for how we gauge money and credit conditions,
and assess the resilience of the financial system as a whole.
Discussions typically jump to the second, financial stability
issue. But I want to look first at some monetary indicators in
the light of these structural changes.

Well, since 2003, institutional investor M4 has accounted for
less than a fifth of the near doubling in total OFC money
holdings. And the share of money in their asset portfolios has
remained in a 3%–5% range (Chart 7). Moreover, some
contacts have suggested that with pension funds and life
companies making greater use of derivatives to manufacture
long-duration assets, some deposits are now held to manage
collateral calls or to generate a Libor-based stream of
payments. Such money holdings would not be readily
available to invest in financial assets.
Chart 7 Pension fund and insurance company money
holdings as a share of total financial assets
Percentages of ICPF assets

Sterling deposits

7

Broad money growth
As has recently attracted a good deal of attention, UK broad
money is up around 15% on a year ago, and more than 25%
since the beginning of 2005 — much more than elsewhere in
the G7 (Chart 6). Of this increase, almost half — or around
£140 billion — is accounted for by the money holdings of
so-called Other Financial Corporations.(1) Central bankers have
to ask whether that represents a threat to inflation and
stability or, rather, a shift in the demand for money that is a
symptom of structural change in the financial system.

8

6
5
4
3
M4
2
1
0
1987

90

93

96

99

2002

05

Source: Bank of England calculations.

There is relatively little research on the macroeconomic
significance of OFC money.(2) The central question is typically
seen as whether institutional investors, such as pension funds
and life insurance companies, are holding an unusually large
amount of money in their asset portfolios, in which case any
‘excess’ might be expected sooner or later to flow into
financial markets, pushing up asset values, which in turn would

Over the past year, the largest contributions to OFC money
growth have, in fact, come from two other groups (Chart 8):
(1) ‘Other’ in the sense of not being a member of the monetary sector (commercial banks
and building societies).
(2) Chrystal, K and Mizen, P (2001), ‘Other financial corporations: Cinderella or ugly
sister of empirical monetary economics?’, Bank of England Working Paper no. 151.

128

Quarterly Bulletin 2007 Q1

‘securities dealers and other’ (8 percentage points);(1) and
what the statisticians label ‘Other Financial Intermediaries’
(contributing a whopping 17 percentage points).

But we should pause before concluding firmly that the money
data are benign. First, their counterpart, bank lending, has
been growing at around 15% (although the three-month
annualised rate is somewhat lower). Second, the money
holdings of non-financial companies have recently been rising
rapidly, perhaps signalling on upside risk to the outlook for
business investment in an environment of robust profits and
aggregate demand.

Chart 8 Contributions to OFCs’ M4 year-on-year
growth by subsector
OFAs
OFIs
Securities dealers and others
Institutional investors
OFCs’ M4 growth

Percentage points

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5

+
0
–
5
10
1999

2000

01

02

03

04

05

06

15

Source: Bank of England calculations.

I would hazard a guess that a significant portion of the money
holdings of securities dealers stems from their so-called
‘matched’ repo books. Although technically these entail
secured deposits with banks, they are not money holdings that
get spent (on assets or goods), and are matched pretty well by
secured (repo) loans to other parts of the financial system.
The ‘OFI’ category is somewhat amorphous, including for
example both private equity funds and special purpose
vehicles (SPVs). Collectively, their holdings of bank deposits
have been growing at an annual rate of over 40% for the past
two years. It is extremely difficult to judge the
macroeconomic significance of this, not least because no
breakdown is available of the money holdings of different
types of ‘OFI’. On the one hand, it may be uninvested cash,
reflecting for example the wave of fund raising by the private
equity industry. That is most definitely cash to be invested in
the equity market, but such fund raisings are highly publicised
and conceivably may already have been discounted in equity
prices via M&A speculation. As for SPVs, they are used for all
sorts of purposes. Some effect transactions within banking
groups, and should ideally be netted off. Some are used for
securitisations, where investors obtain returns linked to the
credit risk on a portfolio of assets. Regular cash-market
securitisations, with a full transfer of the underlying assets,
shrink bank balance sheets. But synthetic securitisations,
which have become prevalent over the past couple of years,
can involve increased money holdings.(2) It is not obvious that
such deposits would be of macroeconomic significance over
and above any effect on asset prices/risk premia stemming
from the prior associated demand for (synthetic) credit.

Third, looking at UK OFC money may be too narrow if we are
trying to assess whether there is an upside risk to asset prices,
and so to aggregate demand, from money growth. Given that
asset prices are today determined in global capital markets,
global rather than domestic money (and credit) growth may
be just as relevant. On one measure, the rate of growth of
‘world’ broad money(3) has slowed from around 15% to around
8% since 2003 (Chart 9), perhaps consistent with the gradual
withdrawal of monetary accommodation in the United States
and elsewhere. However, the treatment of OFCs varies a lot
across the G7,(4) and so their data are not strictly comparable
with the UK M4 numbers. More important, so far as I can tell,
most current calculations of world money growth(5) simply
add up domestic money supplies, and so leave out
cross-border money holdings. That might be a material
omission. For example, external holdings of sterling deposits
with the UK banking system have increased by more than
domestic money since the late 1990s; and by around 15%
over the past year. How much of this growth is attributable to
non-bank financial groups, whether based in the
United Kingdom or overseas, is not known.
Like much of the monetary analysis of the early 1980s, I fear
that this is rather inconclusive, other than underlining that one
has to get one’s hands dirty in analysing the money numbers.
It is plausible that a decent chunk of recent UK M4 growth
should be seen in the light of structural change in the financial
system. Essentially, some types of non-bank financial
intermediation have become more significant, and seem to
have entailed higher money holdings on the definitions
currently employed. If so, recent OFC money growth does not
of itself obviously have malign implications for money
spending and inflation.

(1) The other intermediaries grouped with securities dealers include financial leasing
companies and bank holding companies.
(2) In a synthetic securitisation, the SPV still issues ‘cash’ securities to its investors, but
rather than investing the proceeds in the credit portfolio, it holds a high-quality liquid
asset, which can be a bank deposit. It gains its credit exposure via a credit default
swap. In a recent speech, R G Rajan of the IMF attributed the compression in risk
premia to a shortage of assets. The growth in demand for synthetic exposures is
consistent with that. Rajan, R (2006), ‘Is there a global shortage of fixed assets?’,
remarks at the G-30 meetings in New York, December.
(3) World broad money is a weighted average of individual country M2 or closest national
substitute, using market exchange rates.
(4) Included in the euro area; partly included in Japan; excluded in the United States.
(5) See box on ‘Excess global liquidity, asset prices and inflation’, Inflation Report,
February 2006, page 5.

Speeches Macro, asset price, and financial system uncertainties

Chart 9 Annual world broad money (M2) growth
(individual country M2 (or nearest equivalent)) weighted
by market exchange rates
Per cent

16

129

elsewhere. And loans against a very wide range of collateral
are provided to finance hedge funds;(1) this effectively
amounts to writing deeply out-of-the-money options, where
the risk flows back to the financer in adverse states of the
world.(2)

14
12
10
8
6
4

Chart 10 LCFIs’ debts held for trading versus
representative indices
US LCFIs’ debt holdings
European LCFIs’ debt holdings
Global broad market corporate index
Mortgage-backed securities index
Asset-backed securities index

Indices: 31 Dec. 2000 = 100

300

2

+
0

250

–
1996

97

98

99

2000

01

02

03

04

05

2
200

Source: Bank of England calculations.

150

Originate and distribute: what’s going on on bank
balance sheets?
Much of the debate about this renewed process of
disintermediation has revolved around whether the
burgeoning growth of, for example, structured credit vehicles
and hedge funds increases or impairs the resilience of the
system. This is equivalent to asking about the significance to
stability of the pronounced shift in the business model of
many large banks to ‘originate and distribute’. If they are not
holding on to the loans and other assets they originate, one
might draw the inference that bank balance sheets would have
shrunk.
Nothing could be further from the truth. The balance sheets of
the largest and most complex financial institutions (LCFIs)
have ballooned. Both in the United States and in Europe
(including the United Kingdom), their holdings of equities and
of debt instruments (bonds and loans) have grown more
rapidly than the underlying markets (Chart 10). That does not
exactly look like disintermediation.
How to square this with ‘originate and distribute’? Basically, in
contrast to the pre-Big Bang world in the United Kingdom,
today’s prevailing business model entails a significant
commitment of capital by investment banks. This manifests
itself in a wide range of on balance sheet assets on top of the
more traditional bond and equity books held as part of ‘market
making’. For example, bridge loans are extended to finance
leveraged buyouts prior to more permanent debt instruments
being placed via the capital markets. Similarly, there is an
intermediate stage between origination and distribution of
securitised portfolios, during which they are warehoused on
banks’ balance sheets. As I just described, synthetic
securitisations, by contrast, can involve investment banks
permanently holding corporate bonds and loans to hedge
synthetic short positions, where the risk is transferred

100

2000

01

02

03

04

05

50

Note: BNP Paribas excluded due to lack of H1 interim data.
Sources: Merrill Lynch and SEC filings, published accounts.

So investment banking does use balance sheets, but in
non-traditional ways. Beyond that, there is an extra ingredient
for the commercial banks. As is apparent from the money
numbers, they are very much still in the deposit-gathering
business. On top of maintaining their central role in the
payments system, this means that, even if operating an
‘originate and distribute’ model in their investment banking
business, commercial banks still have substantial funds to
employ in asset portfolios. This can be achieved in a number
of ways: for example, holding onto originated assets, buying
assets after they have been securitised by other banks, or
entering the principal investment business. All three are under
way to a greater or lesser degree. In the United Kingdom, until
quite recently large banks probably held on to more loans than
their peer group.(3) In the United States and parts of
Continental Europe, the commercial banking sector acquired
massive portfolios of securitised assets in the first half of the
decade, possibly diversifying sectoral or geographical
exposures. And a range of banks have been entering or
re-entering the principal investment business.

(1) Synthetic financing, via eg total return swaps, does not show on bank/dealer balance
sheets beyond any net mark-to-market derivative exposure.
(2) In really adverse states of the world, collateral values would not cover all of the
bank/dealer’s exposure, and the net asset value of the hedge fund would have fallen
too.
(3) ‘Private equity: a discussion of risk and regulatory engagement’, Financial Services
Authority Discussion Paper no. 06/6, November 2006.

130

Quarterly Bulletin 2007 Q1

What to make of all this? Well it certainly underlines the
difficulty of using the growth or composition of bank balance
sheets as the sole basis for judging credit conditions. With so
much credit distributed and traded via capital markets,
quantity data have to be put alongside prices (yield spreads)
and, ideally, qualitative information. It is in that context that
the Bank is planning to introduce a formal survey of credit
conditions next year. This important initiative is designed to
help us get behind the money and credit data.

market crash,(1) about the detection of large trader positions.
More generally, this year’s Counterparty Risk Management
Group Report, produced by a group of leading practitioners,
identified a range of issues for the industry to tackle.

A second, rather obvious and by now familiar conclusion is
that, in a narrow sense, it may have become more difficult to
identify where risk resides, although we should not make too
much of that as interest rate, currency and equity risk has been
transferred around the financial system via derivatives for
almost two decades. For me, it is more interesting that, in big
picture terms, many banks have in effect concluded that they
are better at, or will be better rewarded for, managing market
risk — and its sister, counterparty credit risk — than managing
‘buy and hold’ credit risk; and that if they are going to hold
illiquid assets, they should provide a higher return than
bog-standard loans.
This suggests that stability relies on the liquidity of capital
markets — primary as well as secondary markets — proving
durable under stress. Indeed, contacts suggest that one of
their main worries is that something — they don’t know what
— could cause primary markets to shut for a few months,
leaving them holding loans and warehoused portfolios needing
to be marked down over quarterly reporting dates. Another
theme is reliance on secondary markets to shed complex forms
of market risk, especially when it is hard to be confident about
the robustness of correlation assumptions incorporated into
some pricing models and risk measures. Although there is a
spectrum of opinion, many take encouragement from the way
the system has weathered a series of shocks in recent years,
including lately the Amaranth episode. Its non-energy
portfolios were liquidated smoothly; prime brokers largely
released the resulting ‘excess collateral’ in a timely manner;
and other parts of the hedge fund industry provided a pool of
capital to take on the risk in the natural gas contracts. I would
not want to play that down but, inevitably, some caution may
be warranted too. Amaranth’s ability to build up highly
concentrated positions in centrally cleared markets was a
reminder of some earlier lessons, dating back to the 1987 stock

Macro and financial market uncertainty
As will have been apparent, the issues I have been discussing
are not really separable. There are, to be clear, a lot of reasons
for confidence in monetary and financial stability being
sustained. Monetary regimes are much improved. Banks are
generally regarded as well capitalised. Innovation has enabled
risk to be dispersed more widely, including outside the banking
sector. And capital markets are deeper.
Nevertheless, it is a potential concern that, looking forward,
financial markets may not be pricing for — which means that
investors may not be insuring themselves against — the range
of uncertainties that preoccupy the official sector. Maybe the
official sector is wrong. Or maybe there is an underestimation
of risks in the market, perhaps associated with the widely
discussed search for yield, and possibly also with
overconfidence in the capacity of monetary authorities or
liquid capital markets to smooth out all shocks.
This poses three questions. Whether the risks will crystallise.
Whether, if they were to, any such crystallisation would be
orderly or disorderly in financial markets. And whether if asset
markets were disorderly, that would feed back into the
financial system in ways that both seriously amplified the
adjustment and created serious threats to systemic stability.
I fear that the answers are unknowable. But the task for
central banks is nevertheless clear enough. Working with our
partners in regulatory organisations and in other central banks,
we must seek to understand today’s global banking system
and capital markets well enough to tell the difference, if and
when called upon to do so, between a problem requiring solely
a macroeconomic policy response and a more complex
financial stability problem. And, most important of all, central
banks must strive to maintain the medium-term credibility of
monetary policy, as an essential pre-condition for the stability
in which both the real and financial economy can thrive. Not
pretending that the world is simpler or safer than the reality is
one small part of that endeavour.

(1) See, for example, the US Brady Report, and the report of the Hong Kong Securities
Review Committee, 1987.

