30

Alastair Clark
Andrew Large

O c ca s io n a l P a p e r 83

Macroprudential Policy:
Addressing the Things
We Don’t Know

Group of Thirty, Washington, DC

About the Authors
Alastair Clark, CBE, formerly Executive Director and Adviser to the
Governor of the Bank of England, has since 2009 been Senior Adviser to
HM Treasury on Financial Stability and is a member of the UK’s new
interim Financial Policy Committee. He has also acted as an independent
adviser to overseas public authorities in relation to financial stability and
crisis prevention issues. He has been at various times a member of many
international groups linked to the G20, the Financial Stability Board, and
the Bank for International Settlements. In 2005 he co-chaired, with Walter
Kielholz, a G30 Study Group looking at the systemic impact of reinsurance.
He holds degrees from Cambridge University and the
London School of Economics.
Sir Andrew Large retired in 2006 as Deputy Governor of the Bank of
England where he had served since 2002. He now acts independently for
central banks and governments in relation to financial stability and crisis
prevention issues. Andrew Large’s career has covered a wide range of senior
positions in the world of global finance, within both the private and public
sectors. He is in addition Chairman of the Senior Advisory Board of Oliver
Wyman, Senior Adviser to the Hedge Fund Standards Board, Chairman
of the Advisory Committee of Marshall Wace, and Chairman of the Board
Risk Committee of Axis, Bermuda.
ISBN 1-56708-154-1
Copies of this paper are available for $10 from:
The Group of Thirty
1726 M Street, N.W., Suite 200
Washington, D.C. 20036
Tel.: (202) 331-2472 Fax: (202) 785-9423
E-mail: info@group30.org Web: http://www.group30.org

Occasional Paper
No. 83

Macroprudential Policy: Addressing
the Things We Don’t Know

Alastair Clark and Andrew Large

Published by
Group of Thirty©
Washington, DC
2011

Contents

Preface

5

Introduction

7

I. The Objective of Macroprudential Policy
II. The Issue of a Separate Policy Area

11
15

III. Conflicts of Objectives

19

IV. Statutory Backing

23

V. Identification of Vulnerabilities
VI. Data
VII. Policy Instruments

25
29
33

VIII. Institutional Framework

37

IX. “Peacetime” vs. Crisis

41

X. International Dimension

45

Final Remarks

47

Bibliography

49

Group of Thirty Members 2011

51

Group of Thirty Publications since 1990

55

Preface
The Group of Thirty’s mission is to deepen understanding of international economic and financial issues, to explore the international repercussions of decisions taken in the public and private sectors, and to
examine the choices available to market practitioners and policymakers.
In pursuance of this objective, the Group has been actively engaged
in analysis of and the policy implications arising from the various facets
of the financial crisis of 2008–2009. We have promulgated financial reform recommendations that impacted the G20 and U.S. reform process,
and identified necessary reforms to the International Monetary Fund,
many of which have since been addressed by the Fund’s membership.
In 2010 the Group turned to the need for new mechanisms designed to
address the financial stability of the system as a whole in “Enhancing
Financial Stability and Resilience: Macroprudential Policy, Tools, and
Systems for the Future.”
The following paper by Alastair Clark and Andrew Large: “Macroprudential Policy: Addressing the Things We Don’t Know,” further
develops key themes and issues and builds upon the Group’s work in
this space. We hope that the paper provokes further debate and discussion amongst the central banking and financial communities on this
very important topic.

Jacob Frenkel
Chairman
Group of Thirty
5

Introduction
In May 2010 we published a paper, “Systemic Policy and Financial
Stability: A Framework for Delivery,” on macroprudential policy frameworks. We identified a number of issues that arise in creating such
frameworks and some of the difficulties and uncertainties involved.
These issues were further addressed in the major report prepared by
the Group of Thirty, “Enhancing Financial Stability and Resilience:
Macroprudential Policy, Tools, and Systems for the Future,” published
in October 2010.
Since then, the debate surrounding macroprudential policy has
moved on.
First, the need for a macroprudential component in financial policy
now seems to be widely accepted. Reliance on an “un-joined up” set
of microprudential measures will not suffice.
Second, there is acknowledgement that the rates of economic growth
consistent with financial stability, and therefore sustainable in the long
term, may be lower in some countries than the rates typical of the past
decade or more. As a result, tensions may arise between short-term
political priorities and the objective of sustained financial stability.
Third, it has become clear that a severe financial crisis may involve
a significant and permanent—or at least long-term—loss of gross domestic product.
Fourth, the lessons learned in a number of emerging markets during
the Asian debt crisis in the late 1990s have widened the debate about
macroprudential policy to include, for example, the potential role of
capital controls.
7

Fifth, a number of countries—emerging markets as well as mature
economies—are in the process of introducing more or less explicit institutional arrangements designed to integrate macroprudential policy
into the overall economic policy framework.
Sixth, although some countries may still prefer the historical approach of relatively informal “presumptive behavior” by the central
bank to deliver policy in this field, many are finding that the demands
of accountability, transparency, and governance are leading them toward a more formalized approach.
Many initiatives are now underway in this area at both the national
and the international level (see bibliography). Even so, some important
issues of principle and practice remain to be definitively resolved. This
paper identifies ten such “difficult issues” and sets out some of the main
considerations in addressing them. The answers need to be worked out
by each country, taking account of the local circumstances.

Ten Issues of Principle and Practice
1. It is clear that a successful framework requires the input and
engagement of a number of institutions, with a shared
objective of delivering financial stability.
2. There is, nevertheless, a need for a clear institutional focus of authority with an objective, mandate, and powers
to deliver.
3. That institution needs to adopt an integrated approach,
linking collection of data and market intelligence, analysis and assessment, development of policy proposals, and
implementation.
4. There are at least two sub-objectives, “conjunctural” and
“resilience.” The former is to identify and address risks such
as an undue build-up of leverage, credit, or debt; the latter
is to monitor and enhance the resilience of the financial
system and its capacity to weather shocks while continuing
to provide essential financial services.

8

5. Given the potential cost of “excessive” financial stability (or,
perhaps more accurately, excessive de-risking) in terms of
economic growth, there is a political judgment to be made
about what level of risk a country is prepared to sustain or
conversely how safe the system should be.
6. Given that macroprudential policy interacts with a range of
other policy areas, some tension is probably unavoidable
both on the substance of policy and in interinstitutional (and
conceivably interpersonal) relationships. Ways of minimizing
and managing this need to be found.
7.

As always, it is clear that having high-quality staff with the
right experience and the capability and confidence to make
difficult judgments is critical.

8. The lead macroprudential authority needs to have effective
tools at its disposal.
9.

The lead macroprudential authority needs to be subject to appropriate governance, transparency, and accountability
arrangements.

10. There needs to be recognition of the difference between
“peacetime” and crisis, and of the different arrangements
needed to handle these two states. The macroprudential role
is likely to be mainly preventive, that is, in peacetime; but
there needs to be a clearly understood mechanism for making the transition between the two states.

At the same time, and as noted, many questions remain wholly or
partially unanswered. This paper identifies ten such questions and
sketches the arguments relevant to each one. The questions in summary are:
I. How should the objective of macroprudential policy be framed?
II. Is macroprudential policy a genuinely separate policy area?
9

III. How can conflicts of objectives with other policy areas be
handled?
IV. How much of any macroprudential regime should be set out in
statute?
V. How should the identifications of vulnerabilities be approached?
VI. What data are needed?
VII. What macroprudential policy instruments are available and will
they work?
VIII. How should the institutional framework be designed?
IX. How should the transition from peacetime to crisis and crisis
itself be handled?
X. How can domestic and international arrangements best be fitted
together?
We have attempted to treat each issue in a reasonably self-contained
way; given that the questions are in some degree overlapping, however,
that is also true of the answers.

10

I. The Objective of Macroprudential Policy
How should the objective of macroprudential policy be defined? How
broad or narrow should it be? This section aims to create a possible
statement of objective. However, several features, detailed below, complicate the definition.

Policy gap
The current focus on so-called macroprudential policy derives from
a view that, in the run-up to the 2008–2009 financial crisis, the authorities in many countries were too preoccupied with price stability
(of goods and services) and with firm-level supervision and regulation
(microprudential policy), and paid insufficient attention to systemwide
financial developments. The underlying objective of macroprudential
policy is to address this weakness. It seeks to reduce, even if it cannot
eliminate, the risk of crises and perhaps also to mitigate the effects of
a crisis should one nevertheless occur (although some would say that
the latter lies outside the scope of macroprudential policy per se).

Conjuncture vs. resilience
Relevant “systemwide financial developments” can be of essentially
two kinds, one relating to risks facing the financial system at a particular time (“conjunctural”) and the other relating to the capacity of
the system to withstand the crystallization of these risks (“resilience”).
There can be trade-offs in terms of avoiding instability—for example,

11

the more resilient the system the greater may be the acceptable level
of conjunctural risk; but “excessive” resilience may involve a penalty
in terms of economic growth.
Conjunctural risks might arise, for example, from the evolution over
time of certain key variables such as credit, debt, and leverage across
the financial system as a whole, or major parts of it.
Resilience will reflect, for example, overall levels of capital and liquidity and the pattern of exposures among financial intermediaries as
well as a wide range of structural issues, including such matters as the
robustness of market infrastructure, effectiveness of microprudential
supervision, and the form of accounting rules as they affect reporting
and disclosure.
There is, at present, no clear consensus on where within this territory the boundary of macroprudential policy should lie. That may not
matter too much provided each of the different dimensions is recognized and addressed in an effective way, and if the responsibilities and
powers of the different relevant authorities are coordinated satisfactorily. In practice, to date, the macroprudential label has typically been
applied mainly to conjunctural issues and the objective of mitigating
the procyclical consequences of “normal” regulatory capital rules and
point-in-time risk weightings.
Even then, however, different issues arise depending on the precise
choice of “target variable(s)” and in determining an acceptable range
for that variable. In some cases, there may also be a tension between
desirability and deliverability.
For example, there is a widely held view that the rapid growth of
credit during the early and mid-2000s was a critical factor in the crisis.
Macroprudential action to curb the growth of credit would, therefore,
have been indicated. But it is far from clear how effective the available instruments would have been. For example, attempts in various
jurisdictions during the 1970s and 1980s to influence or limit credit
growth were generally ineffective. Equally, determination of an “acceptable” as opposed to a “dangerous” level of debt is difficult and probably
both time and state dependent. Moreover, setting quantitative targets
without having instruments to deliver them is likely to be ineffective
and damaging to credibility.

12

Should policy restrict focus to resilience?

These difficulties have led some to propose that macroprudential policy
should focus on the narrower “resilience” objective, or even just the
resilience of the banking sector, so that macroprudential policy would
effectively be an overlay on conventional microprudential supervision.
It would thus seek to ensure—through the setting of overall capital,
liquidity, and other requirements—that the banking sector as a whole
remains robust against risks arising from the wider economic and financial environment. In the terminology of Basel III, macroprudential
policy would be a form of Pillar 2 but with the discretion being exercised
on the basis of systemwide rather than firm-specific factors.
In our view, the reality is that both dimensions—conjunctural risk
and resilience—are relevant to stability. Ignoring one is likely to call
into question the overall effectiveness of the macroprudential regime.

Policy interactions
A further critical consideration is the compatibility of the macroprudential objective with other economic and financial policy objectives.
This is most obviously a question in relation to monetary policy where,
for example, pursuit of a macroprudential credit growth target or
ceiling would be likely to have a bearing on the monetary transmission mechanism and on economic growth. But it also applies to other
policy areas such as competition, consumer protection and, indeed,
fiscal policy. How to capture such policy interactions is discussed in
the response to Question III.

Conclusion
For all the above reasons, there is at this stage no clear consensus on a
definition of the objectives(s) of macroprudential policy. Perhaps the
best that can be done is to define what we seek to prevent and outline the
key mechanisms available to achieve that. Moreover, the “right answer”
will depend to a degree on the characteristics of individual national
financial systems. So a pragmatic definition of objective, applicable to a
“lead authority” for macroprudential policy, which sets the complexity
in a manageable framework, might be along the following lines:

13

To review and assess the systemic conjuncture and
resilience of the financial system, to identify actual
or incipient threats to financial stability, to apply the
policy instruments available directly to the authority
to address these threats or, where responsibility for
relevant instruments lies elsewhere, to recommend
policy actions to be taken by other authorities.
The expectation would, of course, be that the objective might in
future be refined and adapted in the light of experience.

II. The Issue of a Separate Policy Area
Should “macroprudential policy” be regarded as a genuinely distinct
policy “silo” with its own distinct instruments, or is it just shorthand for
other policy makers taking account of systemic financial developments
in setting the instruments of fiscal, monetary, and other “conventional”
policies? Debate continues on this issue.

What actually failed?
As noted in response to Question I, the recent emphasis on macroprudential policy derives from a view that the “traditional” approaches to
macroeconomic policy and financial regulation were inadequate in the
build-up to the 2008–2009 crisis. But several conclusions are possible.
Specifically, did the failure:
•

Result from inappropriate or insufficient use of existing instruments?

•

Reflect the inability of those instruments to deliver financial
stability?

•

Reflect a “targets and instruments” problem, in the sense that
instruments were available to deliver financial stability but they
were hypothecated to other desirable policy objectives, such as price
stability?

15

Distinguishing objectives from instruments
In this debate, it is helpful to distinguish objectives from instruments.
With regard to objectives, it seems fair to say that—certainly in many
mature economies—the goal of systemic financial stability and the
avoidance of crises was not clearly articulated. It was taken for granted,
in two senses:
•

First, as an objective, it was obviously desirable and therefore did
not need to be spelled out.

•

Second, at least by implication, it was thought to be a by-product
of pursuing sensible macroeconomic and regulatory policies, allied
to belief in the Efficient Markets Hypothesis, and again therefore
did not need to be separately recognized.

Recent experience has called both of these propositions into question.
It is, therefore, now widely accepted that a separate objective—a macroprudential objective—relating to the stability of the financial system
as a whole needs to form part of the overall economic and financial
policy framework. But, as indicated in the response to Question I, that
leaves open the precise formulation of the objective.
The position in relation to instruments is more difficult. The problem
is that many of the instruments that might potentially be of value in
delivering a macroprudential objective are already assigned to other
policy goals. Thus, short-term interest rates are typically used in monetary policy to influence nominal demand and thence, inflation; and
capital requirements are one of the main instruments of (microprudential) regulatory policy, designed to limit the likelihood of default
by individual banks or other financial institutions. These instruments,
though set to achieve other objectives, can nevertheless have an important influence on systemic stability. It has been very hard to identify a
distinct set of “macroprudential instruments” whose sole or main effect
is confined to systemic stability.
Moreover, although there is some overlap, the instruments relevant
to delivery of different formulations of a macroprudential objective
may be different. In the case of resilience, raising capital requirements
would go at least some of the way to achieving it. But, particularly in
the short run, they may not be very effective in curbing credit growth
or leverage, where margin requirements—imposed, for example, as
loan-to-value (LTV) ceilings—may have more impact.

16

Overall, it may be better to think in terms not of specifically macroprudential instruments but rather instruments generally, some of
which can be applied to macroprudential (as well as other) objectives.

Separate or simultaneous?
Perhaps the underlying issue is how far it is possible or sensible to
“silo-ize” macroprudential policy making—to try to define precise objectives, to assign particular instruments for delivery of each one, and
then to make a particular institution responsible for deployment of the
instrument(s) to meet the objective. In favor of such an approach is
clarity and accountability. The alternative, which may, however, better
reflect economic reality, is to recognize the interactions among instruments and to set some of them simultaneously to deliver the best fit to
a number of different objectives. The disadvantage of this approach is
that goals and responsibilities can become blurred.

Conclusion
The approach in most countries is likely to be a pragmatic choice among
the following alternatives:
•

Ask each policy area to “take systemic issues into account.”

•

Acknowledge the need for a separate policy “channel” but fuse this
into an existing policy area (the usual candidate being monetary
policy).

•

Create a separate macroprudential policy framework with responsibility for monitoring and assessing systemic risks and initiating
action in response. It would provide for a degree of influence over
the use of a number of instruments, some of which may be available uniquely to the lead macroprudential authority.

Because of the complexities and uncertainties of implementation and
the inertia or resistance from existing silos, the first option risks being
ineffective and the second risks confusion through trying to meet two
policy goals within one framework. This would seem to point toward
the third option.
Naturally, with experience and understanding of what the framework
is seeking to achieve and how—at the level of both policy makers and

17

the public—alternative approaches may emerge. The choice made by
an individual country is in any case likely to depend on factors such
as the size and stage of development of its financial sector, attitudes
to governance and accountability, and the channels of interaction between the financial system and the real economy and the extent of its
international financial linkages.

18

III. Conflicts of Objectives
What conflicts can arise between macroprudential and other policy
objectives, notably monetary and regulatory? Can the macroprudential
objective be made “symmetric” in relation to these other objectives, for
example, growth and inflation? Or does there need to be an explicit ex
ante prioritization of objectives?

Potential trade-offs
In broad terms, stability of the financial system and macroprudential
policy designed to achieve it should be consistent with other desirable
economic (and indeed social) goals. Instability in the financial system
is likely to mean that the economy as a whole is unable to function
efficiently—and, as indicated by recent experience, crises can involve
significant social costs. At the margin, however, there may be tradeoffs. A regulatory regime that requires excessive levels of capital may
ensure systemic stability but may at the same time unnecessarily inhibit
the growth and risk-handling capacity of the economy. Equally, rapid
economic growth associated with an excessive and conjuncturally
dangerous expansion of credit, leverage, and debt may well—as again
evidenced by recent experience—lead to financial instability.
In practice, the conflict between systemic stability and growth may,
however, be more apparent than real, certainly in the long term. In
stable periods, macroprudential measures may constrain growth. The
alternative, however, is a higher probability of financial crises, with significant periods of negative or low growth. In reality, the sustainable rate
19

of growth consistent with the maintenance of financial stability seems
unlikely, over a long period, to be lower, and may in fact be higher,
than it would be if the risk of financial instability were disregarded.
In formulating the objective of macroprudential policy, an important
consideration, therefore, is how to capture these trade-offs without
losing a clear focus on systemic stability. Other policy domains with
which trade-offs can arise include fiscal policy, competition policy, and
consumer protection policy.
There may be a useful analogy in the symmetrical target approach
taken by some countries in relation to monetary policy and inflation.
A target is set with a ceiling but also a floor on the level of inflation.
In a similar way, some counterbalance is needed for macroprudential
policy to avoid the “overcooking” of stability measures at the cost of a
disproportionate impact on growth.

The challenges of symmetry
While, in principle, a symmetric approach may be attractive, it is much
harder to implement in the context of systemic stability, because there
is no quantifiable measure of stability and indeed no universally agreed
definition. Probably the best that can be done is to require those responsible for macroprudential policy to have regard for the other policy
objectives on which macroprudential policy might have an impact. But
the obvious questions then are which other policy objectives? And how
much regard? And as mentioned under Question II, any approach based
on “have regards” is likely to dilute transparency and accountability,
even if it is effective at all.
An alternative would be to define ex ante a hierarchy of objectives,
that is, to give explicit priority to, say, inflation over systemic stability.
Even to state this, however, highlights the difficulty; in some circumstances it may be sensible to strike the balance in one place but in other
circumstances priorities may be reversed. Furthermore, even with a
hierarchy of objectives, there would still be the question of how to set
the relevant instruments to respect the prioritization. With multiple
instruments involved, this would not be straightforward.

20

Conclusion
Whatever the mechanism, recent experience has demonstrated that financial stability, and macroprudential policy as an essential contributor
to its delivery, needs to be given higher priority than in the past. But
some flexibility to accommodate a changing environment is necessary.
One approach would be for the mandate of the lead macroprudential
authority to be updated periodically, say annually, with guidance being
given, perhaps by the political authorities, on the attitude the authority
is expected to adopt toward other policy areas.
The question of instruments (as opposed to objectives) and their
interactions is discussed further under Question VII.

21

IV. Statutory Backing
How much of the framework for macroprudential policy should be set
out in statute rather than handled through nonstatutory arrangements
(for example, through memoranda of understanding)? Is it sensible to
introduce a statutory framework at this stage given the limited practical
experience in pursuing macroprudential objectives? Without a statutory
framework, however, are the existing powers and “natural authority” of
the finance ministry, central bank, and others sufficient to implement
measures that may be unpopular but necessary?

In favor of a statutory framework
A number of considerations argue for setting out the broad framework
of macroprudential policy in statute:
•

As a new area of policy, or at least an area that has been judged to
require much greater emphasis than in the past, a statutory framework helps to ensure that the aims, powers, and responsibilities are
as clear and transparent as possible.

•

Insofar as macroprudential policy may sometimes involve overriding or modifying actions taken by other financial authorities (for
example, the microprudential regulator), it is important that there
should be a clear framework for decision making.

23

•

A statutory framework facilitates the creation of clear channels of
accountability for the overall conduct of macroprudential policy,
something that has come to be regarded as increasingly important
in all policy areas in recent years.

•

Insofar as macroprudential policy may sometimes involve taking
actions that would in the past have relied on “presumptive” powers,
that is, powers based on custom and practice rather than having
statutory backing, this may no longer be acceptable or safe.

Against a statutory framework
However, there are a few arguments against setting a broad framework,
notably:
•

Many elements of macroprudential policy remain analytically
uncertain, not well-defined, or both; these include, preeminently,
definition of the objective in any quantifiable way.

•

Trying to carve out a distinct macroprudential policy “silo” may
discourage recognition of interactions with other areas of economic and
financial policy.

Conclusion
On balance, the arguments probably weigh in favor of introducing some
form of explicit statutory framework—and probably sooner rather than
later, while memories of the crisis are still fresh. But in the present state
of knowledge and experience, it is probably best to keep the framework
flexible and relatively simple.
A possible, gradualist approach might begin by setting out the objectives and intent in legislation, perhaps with key features about which
there is a level of confidence, but then providing for the rest of the
framework to be filled out through secondary legislation as experience
increases.

24

V. Identification of Vulnerabilities
How can the three main sources of systemic financial vulnerability—
unsustainable trends in financial aggregates over time, an unstable
pattern of financial exposures, and structural weaknesses—best be
identified? What indicators are most useful?

Identification: having the right people
Various processes can make an important contribution in identifying
vulnerabilities and the build-up of risks in the financial system. These
include data gathering, collecting qualitative market intelligence, inhouse analysis, and reviewing academic analysis, discussed in more
detail in Question VI.
Probably the most important factor, however, in a successful “radar”
function is having a team of smart, experienced, and inquiring people.
They need extensive knowledge of financial activity generally, (including a capacity to interpret the implications of new products and forms of
business activity), and particular knowledge of the national (or regional)
financial system, to be able to spot features that look as if they could
become a threat to stability. The size of such a team obviously depends
to some extent on the size of the relevant financial system but need not
be very large. Quality is more important than quantity. It helps, also,
if such teams include individuals with practical financial experience,
notably of past crises.

25

Indicators
Unsustainable trends in financial aggregates

Indicators of this kind have probably attracted the most attention and
have been subject to the most intensive analysis in the past. The analysis
has covered certain developed economies but also, importantly, emerging economies, particularly in Asia, with experience of the 1990s crisis.
The list of potentially useful indicators is well known and includes
overall leverage ratios for banks and for the principal domestic sectors
of the economy; growth rates and levels of lending and debt related to
particular sectors; and the maturity structure of liabilities, including
dependency on wholesale funding. In many emerging markets the size
and form of capital flows also provide a significant set of indicators.
Even with the long runs of data available for some of these indicators,
however, it has proved difficult to come up with reliable (discriminantanalysis-based) procedures for identifying incipient crises. There are
typically serious Type I or Type II errors in all such procedures.1 This
reinforces the message that, for the time being, at least, it will remain
necessary to rely heavily on the qualitative judgments referred to at
the beginning of this section.
Unstable patterns of financial exposure

These may be spotted through collection and analysis of more conventional financial data (at the firm level and in the aggregate), although,
again, market intelligence may provide useful indications of where to
look. One difficulty here is that historical data, collected mainly for
monetary and macroeconomic and (micro) prudential reasons, may not
be well adapted for macroprudential analysis (see Question VI). Recent
initiatives have begun to address some of these deficiencies, but it will
be several years before sufficient data are available to form a reliable
view of what is or is not relevant. (Experience with the evolution of
shadow banking is a current case in point.)

1

Generally, a Type I (statistical) error signals a problem when there isn’t one, and a Type II error
fails to signal a problem when there is.

26

Resilience-related structural features

Many disparate issues fall under this heading, involving inputs from a
wide variety of sources.
Monitoring the creation and development of new instruments, and
the emergence of new forms of business activity, can give important
clues to potential sources of risk. Are they, for example, designed to
arbitrage regulatory requirements? Do they involve new, perhaps
opaque, ways of providing credit? The development of “shadow banking” is again a case in point.
Recent experience also suggests other important structural indicators, including measures of interconnectedness within the financial
(particularly banking) sector.
In addition, important issues may arise in relation to market infrastructure such as payments, clearing and settlement systems, and from
the authorities’, especially the central bank’s, own market operations,
which may also highlight public sector financial exposures. (Such
considerations were, for example, a principal driving force behind the
introduction of Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) payment systems,
which reduced contagion risk and at the same time central bank exposures in payments systems.)
Finally, other matters such as trading rules, accounting standards,
disclosure requirements, legal provisions, and aspects of the form and
effectiveness of the regulatory system, which may be leading to perverse
or unintended consequences, can all be relevant to an overall assessment of systemic resilience.

Conclusion
The potential indicators of systemic significance are many and varied.
They need to be considered from the points of view both of conjunctural trends and exposures as well as resilience. Judgment as to importance—even with access to relevant data, which are further discussed
in Question VI—is difficult and relies on individual expertise. Agility
of thought and thinking ahead are key.

27

VI. Data
What data or information are needed to support macroprudential
analysis? In what respects do they differ from or go beyond what is
normally collected for the purposes of monetary policy and microprudential financial regulation?
The answer is still under debate, given that the scope of macroprudential analysis is itself not fully agreed.

Existing data sources
Much of the data collected for macroeconomic and monetary policy
purposes and by the micro financial regulator(s) are relevant for macroprudential analysis. So, for example, information on sectoral financial balances, levels and growth of bank credit, sectoral distribution of
exposures, individual firm capital, liquidity and risk profiles, and the
maturity profile of debt form an essential part of the necessary information base. But it may include less detail on, for example, the pattern of
individual banks’ counterparty exposures, on secured versus unsecured
liabilities, and on the maturity breakdown of assets and liabilities, than
is needed to assess systemic vulnerabilities.

29

Additional data for macroprudential purposes
In broad terms, the main additional data requirements are:
•

Aggregate data that will help identify a build-up of risks in the financial system as a whole, especially where these are not evident at
the level of individual institutions. This may seem straightforward
in principle, but at a micro level the data currently collected from
individual firms are often not fully compatible in terms of definitions, timing, and coverage, and are therefore difficult to aggregate.

•

Data on individual institutions that help to assess their likely behavior under stress (as opposed to providing a snapshot of their
current position) and the way this behavior is likely to knock-on to
other parts of the financial system (for example, through balance
sheet and capital market contagion).

•

Data on markets as opposed to institutions, including price trends,
measures of volatility, implied market views about future price
movements (through, for example, option prices), and credit standing (through, for example, credit default swap prices and bond
spreads), and so forth.

Other factors
Data need to be timely, accurate, and reliably available. At the same
time, data overload needs to be avoided. A particular need is to identify
trends in behavior, instances of regulatory arbitrage, new products, and
new legal constructs (see Question V, above).
For this reason, the approach to data and information collection needs
to be selective and flexible, taking account of what seems relevant at
a particular time and in particular circumstances. Moreover, it needs
to extend beyond the regulatory boundary to identify potential risks
arising from new institutions or markets outside the boundary (and
may point to the possible need to adjust the boundary).

Conclusion
In all of this, a balance needs to be struck between, on the one hand,
collecting the data that would be “ideal” and, on the other, the cost (for
the industry) of providing them and (for the authorities) of analyzing

30

them. The costs for financial institutions can be reduced by allowing a
reasonable period for phasing in new requirements so that the necessary
system changes can be synchronized with their internal information
technology cycles. The costs for both the authorities and the banks can
be contained by thinking carefully about what data are really needed
and what is the most cost-efficient way of collecting them, drawing
especially on qualitative intelligence. This is sometimes inexpensively
available but can be extremely helpful in focusing more formal data
collection initiatives.

31

VII. Policy Instruments
What instruments are available to pursue macroprudential policy
objectives? How many are already assigned to other policy objectives?
What evidence is there on their likely effectiveness in delivering macroprudential policy objectives?
This is an area of continuing uncertainty. At least in the mature
economies, few of the potential instruments have been used to pursue
macroprudential objectives. Consequently, there is limited practical
experience to call on. This is less true in relation to some Asian economies, and important lessons are available from the Asian experience.
The choice of instruments depends partly on the definition of objective.
The answers to Questions I, II, and III are also relevant here.

Instruments relevant in addressing conjunctural risks
•

If the goal is to influence overall credit creation in the economy
(including the shadow banking system), or by banks specifically, the
obvious candidates are instruments that affect the price of credit or
aim directly to constrain balance sheet growth. In this category fall
short-term interest rates (affecting the cost of funds), overall capital
or leverage requirements (affecting the cost of intermediation), and
perhaps liquidity requirements (which raise the shadow price of
illiquid loans). There are, however, considerable calibration uncertainties about how much impact these measures are likely to have
and over what period. In addition, their effects are likely to vary

33

from bank to bank depending on their overall capital and liquidity
position. There is the separate possibility of imposing quantitative
limits on either the level or growth of credit, but experience with
such direct controls indicates that they are ineffective beyond the
short term and become increasingly distortionary.
•

If, instead, the goal is defined “from the borrower side” in terms of
increases in debt, instruments that (as above) affect the supply of
credit are again clearly relevant. However, there is the additional
problem of “leakage”; certain categories of borrower may be able
to borrow from outside the banking sector or at least outside the
domestic banking sector. This might be addressed by measures that
make borrowing generally less attractive, for example, by increasing
collateral requirements (including, for example, LTVs) or by changing the tax treatment of interest paid. Some of these measures may,
however, be difficult to enforce without a considerable degree of
international harmonization and coordination (see Question X).
Another potential policy instrument—although again carrying the
risk of long-term distortions—is the selective use of capital controls,
particularly in response to external macroeconomic shocks.

•

If the goal is to address risks associated with the pattern of exposures
among financial intermediaries, instruments of a more “micro” nature are likely to be required, such as capital requirements against
particular concentrations of exposure, or minimum margin requirements against particular kinds of contracts (for example, derivatives and repo). Some of the measures in the following paragraph
may also be relevant, such as requirements for central clearing of
derivative contracts. All such interventions would be directed at
avoiding an excessive build-up of exposures within the financial
sector or concentrations of exposure to particular external parties.

Instruments relevant to resilience
•

To the extent that the goal is set, instead, in terms of remedying
structural weaknesses, interventions of a rather different kind are
likely to be necessary. In some cases, they may involve the encouragement or facilitation of infrastructure projects (for example, securities
settlement systems) designed to reduce risk or clarify its location.

34

•

In others, they may take the form of promoting changes in rules
on accounting or disclosure, or the legal treatment of certain kinds
of transactions. They may also involve reinforcing aspects of microprudential supervision.

Conclusion
The area of instruments and their associated powers requires flexibility
as more is learned about calibration issues.
Many of the instruments, especially those relevant to conjunctural
risks, are already used to pursue other policy objectives—notably shortterm interest rates and inflation, and capital ratios and individual
bank safety and soundness. How far that constrains their use for macroprudential purposes was discussed in Question III. The balance of
instruments and powers may need to be different in different cases;
for example, should there be reluctance to broaden the objective of
interest rate policy, overall capital requirements may be useful as a
macroprudential tool while still leaving some flexibility at the micro
level to address individual bank risks.
Equally, if the focus is on resilience, a different range of perhaps
more qualitative instruments is likely to be needed for the successful
delivery of policy.
Given the potential diversity of instruments, the lead macroprudential authority needs to have correspondingly flexible powers. For some
policy instruments, it may be given the power to direct their usage;
in others, it could be given a power of recommendation, where the
recipient authority is required to comply or explain; and in others, it
may simply have a responsibility to make public recommendations for
other authorities to “take note” without necessarily providing a formal
response. It is in any event unlikely to be realistic to give any one body
a formal, general overriding power of instruction; it would probably be
too wide-ranging to be acceptable.

35

VIII. Institutional Framework
What should be the role of the different financial authorities—the
finance ministry, the central bank, the regulator(s), and the deposit
insurance and investor compensation scheme—in relation to macroprudential policy? Who should have the principal responsibility? Who
should act as the lead macroprudential authority? How should the different authorities engage with each other?

Interrelationships of policy areas and authorities
Macroprudential policy touches on a number of distinct though related
policy areas and can be effected through a wide range of instruments.
It is, therefore, hard to fit into the “one objective-one instrumentone authority” model that has been adopted in other policy areas.
Moreover, some elements of macroprudential policy involve trade-offs
which remain—and may always be—politically contentious and are
not, therefore, easily delegated to an executive agency. For these and
other reasons, a number of different financial authorities are likely to
have an interest, even if in differing degrees, in macroprudential policy.

Roles and capabilities of different authorities
In practice, however, a large part of the technical expertise relevant
to the conduct of macroprudential policy is likely to be found in the
central bank and, to some extent, in the microprudential regulator
(where that is separate). Moreover, the central bank will typically have

37

responsibility for the execution of monetary policy. It will for that reason
be familiar with much of the wider context for macroprudential policy.
The finance ministry is, of course, the interface with the political
process, and will typically have a major say in the overall framework
for, and in defining the precise objectives of, macroprudential policy.
However, given the manifold operational tasks and decisions required, it
probably does not make sense for it to be assigned the central executive
role, notwithstanding its role in setting objectives, mandates, and context.
As for the microprudential regulator, one of the motivations for the
recent focus on financial stability policy generally has been a concern to
emphasize a system-level perspective and not to focus narrowly on the
health of individual institutions. Giving a separate authority—separate,
that is, from the regulator—macroprudential responsibility is one way
of trying to ensure this.

Leadership
If the central bank takes on overall responsibility, it is, nevertheless,
likely to be dependent on other authorities—notably the finance ministry, the microprudential regulator, and the financial conduct regulator—in several respects.
First, it will rely partly on the microprudential regulator for data
and market intelligence.
Second, it will need to take account of information from the finance
ministry on other relevant government policies.
Third, it may be dependent on one or both to take actions or give
effect to recommendations.
This indicates the need for close and effective engagement among
the authorities involved.

Conclusion
Most countries seek to achieve this through some kind of formal highlevel coordinating authority, sometimes with a statutory objective as
an incentive for proactive decision making as opposed to operating as a
talking shop. Such “lead macroprudential authorities,” often chaired by
and anchored at the central bank, (or in some cases the finance ministry), might also include representatives from the deposit guarantee
or investor compensation scheme, the microprudential supervisor and,
possibly, independent parties with requisite experience and capability.

38

Their efforts toward the same shared objectives would be supplemented
by extensive and frequent contact at the working level, together with
analytical research inputs often from the central bank.
One important proviso is that such arrangements can work well in
“peacetime,” when there is sufficient time for issues to be raised and
discussed and for any tensions to be identified and resolved. Arrangements for crisis management may, however, need to be significantly
different. This is discussed further in Question IX.

39

IX. “Peacetime” vs. Crisis
How do governance arrangements and responsibilities need to change
when moving from “peacetime” to the management of a crisis? Does
macroprudential policy—which is intended mainly as preventive—
continue to have a role? What procedure should govern the transition
from “peacetime” to crisis?
Macroprudential policy is intended to reduce the probability of systemic crises. But there is still the possibility that crises will occur. This
raises the question of what macroprudential policy can contribute to
the response.

The lead macroprudential authority
and crisis management
At one level, the lead macroprudential authority is likely to be particularly well placed in terms of data and market intelligence and, assuming
the authority is the central bank, operational involvement in markets
to orchestrate the response to a crisis.
But in an incipient or actual crisis, new considerations and other institutions may become increasingly important and the decision-making
process may need to change.
First, a significant financial crisis is likely to be a political event in
that it will typically affect individuals and the economy generally—for
example, through its social and regional implications—in ways that
go beyond the boundaries of normal regulatory responsibilities or

41

competence. Only the government has the authority to make the choices
that may be required in response.
Second, although efforts are now being made to minimize the likelihood, responding to a crisis may involve using fiscal resources to restore
stability. Since this is ultimately at the discretion of the government
and the finance minister, the finance ministry is bound to be closely
involved.
Third, any deposit guarantee or investor compensation authority
will have an important role in terms of policy, but also operationally.

Models for crisis handling
The cast in a crisis management situation is, therefore, likely to be different from that in “peacetime.” At the same time, the time scale for
decisions is typically much shorter. There is no longer time for fully
prepared discussions and extended arguments; the priority is to have
in place a clear and timely mechanism for making decisions—a clear
message about “who is in charge.”
There is no universally ideal model of how this should be achieved.
It may depend, to some extent, on preexisting relationships among the
different institutions involved. However, there seems a good case for
putting the finance ministry in clear overall charge at the “big picture”
policy level, if only on the basis that many of the most important decisions would have to be in reference to the finance ministry in any case.
That does not mean a wholesale substitution of finance ministry
analysis and judgments for the possibly technically better informed
views of the central bank and regulator, but it does mean that, where
there are differences of views, the finance ministry unequivocally has
the ultimate power of decision.
The operational leadership role might, nevertheless, sensibly be assigned to the central bank, given the importance that financial and
monetary operations are likely to have in the management of any crisis
and that the central bank, as part of its normal role, will have the personnel and systems in place to execute them. Note, however, that the
role is likely to lie with the central bank as central bank not—should
it be the case—as lead macroprudential authority.
The regulator would clearly also have to be closely involved—
whether it is part of the central bank or separate—not only to carry out

42

any necessary regulatory actions but also to ensure that they respect
international regulatory rules and commitments.
This, obviously, represents a significant shift of approach from the
proposed “peacetime” model.

Who pulls the trigger?
It raises, in turn, the question of what procedure should be followed in
moving from peacetime to crisis. Again, there is no universally agreed
answer. And it is not just a technical judgment; it also needs to take
account of the likely motivations of the different parties involved.
One approach would be to define a trigger in “hard” terms, based
on thresholds for certain key variables. This has the virtue of clarity
but could be exposed to “gaming” around the chosen variables and is
inherently inflexible. An alternative would be to assign the responsibility on a more discretionary basis to the lead macroprudential authority.
But there is then a risk of “forbearance” insofar as the authority may
be reluctant to signal a crisis, implying a failure in its preventive role.
On the other hand, it would not wish to be exposed to a charge of having unduly delayed action if the responsibility for initiating action was
clearly signaled in its mandate.
In practice, it may be possible to combine “hard” and “soft” triggers
in an arrangement where a “hard” trigger initiates the transition unless it is explicitly overridden by the lead macroprudential authority.

Conclusion
It seems likely that in most jurisdictions the key role of the lead macroprudential authority will be preventive. However, it may also be well
placed to play a role in triggering the move from peacetime to crisis
when financial stability seems to be under threat.
The appropriate role of the authority during a crisis is not so clear.
Its processes may not be designed to deal well with operational and
policy decisions in compressed timescales and under external, including
political, pressures. But, on the other hand, it would seem unwise to
overlook the analytical capacity and experience of the lead macroprudential authority as a valuable input in handling a crisis. Mechanisms
need to be developed to facilitate this input in the different institutional
context of crisis management.

43

X. International Dimension
How far is it possible or sensible to develop macroprudential policy on a
national rather than an international basis? If international consensus
is not achievable, which elements of macroprudential policy can be
implemented at the national level?
Given the degree of interconnectedness among major financial centers
and, therefore, the exposure of one national financial system to problems
in others, the obvious ambition should be to achieve a high degree of
convergence in relation to macroprudential (as well as other aspects of
financial stability) policy. Without that, significant arbitrage opportunities are likely to emerge that may undermine the impact of national
policy measures and lead to competitive distortions. This is clearly the
case in relation, for example, to additional capital requirements.
That is not to gainsay the need for nationally based frameworks for
macroprudential policy, but how far it is possible or sensible to go at the
national level depends partly on how the objective of macroprudential
policy is defined and on a range of other disparate considerations, including a country’s relative cyclical position and how much the authorities are concerned about the competitive position of financial activity
in the country. (Note, however, that insofar as macroprudential policy
is concerned with reducing or eliminating the fiscal cost of potential
government financial support in a crisis, that loss of subsidy is likely
to be reflected in one way or another in the competitive position of
those who enjoyed it.)

45

The current approach in international discussions does indeed put a
good deal of emphasis on encouraging individual countries to develop
effective national macroprudential policy arrangements within an overall framework being developed by the Financial Stability Board (FSB)
and the International Monetary Fund (IMF). The as yet unanswered
question is whether, in the absence of a substantial degree of international convergence, countries will be able to bring about significant
improvement in national systemic stability without incurring, at least
in the short term, seemingly unacceptable costs.
At a practical level, perhaps the most important but intractable current issue is that of developing an effective mechanism for the resolution
of internationally dispersed banks, so-called (globally) systemically
important financial institutions (SIFIs or G-SIFIs), which requires of
its nature a substantial degree of international coordination and, in
some areas at least, convergence of practice.

Conclusion
Fiscal capacity and many aspects of statute essentially exist only at the
national level. This seriously limits the capacity of international bodies
to take on an operational role in crisis management, although they (for
example, the IMF and FSB) can in principle have a valuable part to play
in identifying risks, promoting preventive measures, setting and enforcing standards, and disseminating good practice. And the IMF clearly
also has its historical role both in handling macroeconomic problems
(which might lead to financial crises) and in encouraging resolution
of longer-term issues of macroeconomic convergence.

46

Final Remarks
As this paper has identified, difficult issues remain with regard to
the creation of macroprudential policy. While all countries need to
develop their own answers to the questions considered here, achieving international financial stability—that is stability in a system that
is perhaps more internationally interconnected than any other part of
the economy—is likely, nevertheless, to depend crucially on further
progress in “joining up” the actions of different national authorities.

47

Bibliography
Bank for International Settlements. 2011. “Central Bank Governance and Financial
Stability.” Study Group for the Central Bank Governance Group, Basel, May.
Bank of England. 2009. “The Role of Macroprudential Policy: A Discussion Paper.”
London, November.
de Larosière, Jacques, Chairman, and Leszek Balcerowicz, Otmar Issing, Rainer
Masera, Callum McCarthy, Lars Nyberg, José Peréz, and Onno Ruding. 2009. “Report
of the High-Level Group on Financial Supervision in the EU.” European Commission,
Brussels, February.
Group of Thirty. 2010. “Enhancing Financial Stability and Resilience:
Macroprudential Policy, Tools, and Systems for the Future.” Group of Thirty Working
Group on Macroprudential Policy, Washington, DC, October.
Hoodguin, Lex, Chairman, and the Committee on the Global Financial System.
2010. “Macroprudential Instruments and Frameworks: A Stocktaking of Issues and
Experiences.” Bank for International Settlements, Basel, May.
Hubbard R. Glenn, and John L. Thorton, Co-Chairmen, and the Committee on
Capital Markets Regulation. 2009. “The Global Financial Crisis: A Plan for Regulatory
Reform [the Squam Lake Report].” Committee on Capital Markets Regulation,
Cambridge, MA, May.
International Monetary Fund. 2010. “A Fair and Substantial Contribution by the
Financial Sector: An Interim Report for the G-20.” Washington, DC, April.
Large, Sir Andrew. 2010. “Systemic Policy and Financial Stability: A Framework for
Delivery.” Paper presented to the Future of World Finance Group convened by the
London School of Economics Centre for the Study of Capital Market Dysfunctionality
and the Centre for Economic Performance, Centre for the Study of Financial
Innovation, London, June.

49

Group of Thirty Members 2011*
Paul A. Volcker
Chairman of the Board of Trustees, Group of Thirty
Chairman, President Barack Obama’s Economic Recovery Advisory Board
Former Chairman, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Jacob A. Frenkel
Chairman and CEO, Group of Thirty
Chairman, JPMorgan Chase International
Former Governor, Bank of Israel
Former Professor of Economics, University of Chicago
Former Counselor, Director of Research, International Monetary Fund
Geoffrey L. Bell
Executive Secretary, Group of Thirty
President, Geoffrey Bell & Company, Inc.
Abdlatif Al-Hamad
Chairman, Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development
Former Minister of Finance and Minister of Planning, Kuwait
Leszek Balcerowicz
Professor, Warsaw School of Economics
Chairman of the Board, Bruegel
Former President, National Bank of Poland
Former Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance, Poland
Jaime Caruana
General Manager, Bank for International Settlements
Former Financial Counsellor, International Monetary Fund
Former Governor, Banco de España
Former Chairman, Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
Domingo Cavallo
Chairman and CEO, DFC Associates, LLC
Former Minister of Economy, Argentina
E. Gerald Corrigan
Managing Director, Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.
Former President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Guillermo de la Dehesa Romero
Director and Member of the Executive Committee, Grupo Santander
Former Deputy Managing Director, Banco de España
Former Secretary of State, Ministry of Economy and Finance, Spain
Mario Draghi
Governor, Banca d’Italia
Chairman, Financial Stability Board
Member of the Governing and General Councils, European Central Bank
Former Vice Chairman and Managing Director, Goldman Sachs International

*

As of August 18, 2011.

51

William C. Dudley
President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Martin Feldstein
Professor of Economics, Harvard University
President Emeritus, National Bureau of Economic Research
Former Chairman, Council of Economic Advisers
Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.
President and CEO, TIAA-CREF
Former Chairman, Swiss Re America Holding Corporation
Former Vice Chairman, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Stanley Fischer
Governor, Bank of Israel
Former First Managing Director, International Monetary Fund
Arminio Fraga Neto
Founding Partner, Gávea Investimentos
Chairman of the Board, BM&F-Bovespa
Former Governor, Banco Central do Brasil
Gerd Häusler
Chief Executive Officer, Bayerische Landesbank
Member of the Board of Directors and Senior Advisor, RHJ International
Former Managing Director and Member of the Advisory Board, Lazard & Co.
Former Counselor and Director, International Monetary Fund
Former Managing Director, Dresdner Bank
Philipp Hildebrand
Chairman of the Governing Board, Swiss National Bank
Former Partner, Moore Capital Management
Mervyn King
Governor, Bank of England
Former Professor of Economics, London School of Economics
Paul Krugman
Professor of Economics, Woodrow Wilson School, Princeton University
Former Member, Council of Economic Advisors
Guillermo Ortiz Martinez
President and Chairman, Grupo Finaciero Banorte
Former Governor, Banco de México
Chairman of the Board, Bank for International Settlements
Former Secretary of Finance and Public Credit, Mexico
Kenneth Rogoff
Thomas D. Cabot Professor of Public Policy and Economics, Harvard University
Former Chief Economist and Director of Research, IMF
Tharman Shanmugaratnam
Deputy Prime Minister & Minister for Finance & Manpower, Singapore
Chairman, Monetary Authority of Singapore
Chairman of International Monetary & Financial Committee, IMF
Former Managing Director, Monetary Authority of Singapore

52

Masaaki Shirakawa
Governor, Bank of Japan
Former Professor, Kyoto University School of Government
Lawrence H. Summers
Charles W. Eliot University Professor at Harvard University
Former Director, National Economics Council for President Barack Obama
Former President, Harvard University
Former Secretary of the Treasury
Jean-Claude Trichet
President, European Central Bank
Former Governor, Banque de France
Lord Adair Turner
Chairman, Financial Services Authority
Member of the House of Lords, United Kingdom
David Walker
Senior Advisor, Morgan Stanley International, Inc.
Former Chairman, Morgan Stanley International, Inc.
Former Chairman, Securities and Investments Board, U.K.
Yutaka Yamaguchi
Former Deputy Governor, Bank of Japan
Former Chairman, Euro Currency Standing Commission
Ernesto Zedillo
Director, Yale Center for the Study of Globalization, Yale University
Former President of Mexico
Zhou Xiaochuan
Governor, People’s Bank of China
Former President, China Construction Bank
Former Assistant Minister of Foreign Trade

Senior Members

William R. Rhodes
President and CEO, William R. Rhodes Global Advisors
Senior Advisor, Citigroup
Former Senior Vice Chairman, Citigroup
Marina v N. Whitman
Professor of Business Administration & Public Policy, University of Michigan
Former Member, Council of Economic Advisors

Emeritus Members

Jacques de Larosière
President, Eurofi
Former Conseiller, BNP Paribas
Former President, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Former Managing Director, International Monetary Fund
Former Governor, Banque de France

53

Richard A. Debs
Advisory Director, Morgan Stanley
Former President, Morgan Stanley International
Former COO, Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Gerhard Fels
Former Director, Institut der deutschen Wirtschaft
Toyoo Gyohten
President, Institute for International Monetary Affairs
Former Chairman, Bank of Tokyo
John G. Heimann
Senior Advisor, Financial Stability Institute
Former U.S. Comptroller of the Currency
Erik Hoffmeyer
Chairman, Politiken-Fonden
Former Chairman, Danmarks Nationalbank
Peter B. Kenen
Walker Professor of Economics & International Finance Emeritus, Princeton University
Former Senior Fellow in International Economics, Council on Foreign Relations
William McDonough
Former Vice Chairman, Bank of America/ Merrill Lynch
Former Chairman, Public Company Accounting Oversight Board
Former President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Ernest Stern
Partner and Senior Advisor, The Rohatyn Group
Former Managing Director, JPMorgan Chase
Former Managing Director, World Bank
Shijuro Ogata
Deputy Chairman, Pacific Asia Region, the Trilateral Commission
Former Deputy Governor, Bank of Japan
Former Deputy Governor, Japan Development Bank
Sylvia Ostry
Distinguished Research Fellow, Munk Centre for International Studies, Toronto
Former Ambassador for Trade Negotiations, Canada
Former Head, OECD Economics and Statistics Department

54

Group of Thirty Publications since 1990
REPORTS

Sharing the Gains from Trade: Reviving the Doha
Study Group Report. 2004
Key Issues in Sovereign Debt Restructuring
Study Group Report. 2002
Reducing the Risks of International Insolvency
A Compendium of Work in Progress. 2000
Collapse: The Venezuelan Banking Crisis of ‘94
Ruth de Krivoy. 2000
The Evolving Corporation: Global Imperatives and National Responses
Study Group Report. 1999
International Insolvencies in the Financial Sector
Study Group Report. 1998
Global Institutions, National Supervision and Systemic Risk
Study Group on Supervision and Regulation. 1997
Latin American Capital Flows: Living with Volatility
Latin American Capital Flows Study Group. 1994
Defining the Roles of Accountants, Bankers
and Regulators in the United States
Study Group on Accountants, Bankers and Regulators. 1994
EMU after Maastricht
Peter B. Kenen. 1992
Sea Changes in Latin America
Pedro Aspe, Andres Bianchi, and Domingo Cavallo,
with discussion by S.T. Beza and William Rhodes. 1992
The Summit Process and Collective Security: Future Responsibility Sharing
The Summit Reform Study Group. 1991
Financing Eastern Europe
Richard A. Debs, Harvey Shapiro, and Charles Taylor. 1991
The Risks Facing the World Economy
The Risks Facing the World Economy Study Group. 1991

THE WILLIAM TAYLOR MEMORIAL LECTURES

It’s Not Over ’Til It’s Over: Leadership and Financial Regulation
Thomas M. Hoenig. 2010
The Credit Crisis: The Quest for Stability and Reform
E. Gerald Corrigan. 2008
Lessons Learned from the 2008 Financial Crisis
Eugene A. Ludwig. 2008

55

Two Cheers for Financial Stability
Howard Davies. 2006
Implications of Basel II for Emerging Market Countries
Stanley Fischer. 2003
Issues in Corporate Governance
William J. McDonough. 2003
Post Crisis Asia: The Way Forward
Lee Hsien Loong. 2001
Licensing Banks: Still Necessary?
Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa. 2000
Banking Supervision and Financial Stability
Andrew Crockett. 1998
Global Risk Management
Ulrich Cartellieri and Alan Greenspan. 1996
The Financial Disruptions of the 1980s: A Central Banker Looks Back
E. Gerald Corrigan. 1993

special REPORTS

Enhancing Financial Stability and Resilience:
Macroprudential Policy, Tools, and Systems for the Future
Macroprudential Policy Working Group. 2010
The Reform of the International Monetary Fund
IMF Reform Working Group. 2009
Financial Reform: A Framework for Financial Stability
Financial Reform Working Group. 2009
The Structure of Financial Supervision:
Approaches and Challenges in a Global Marketplace
Financial Regulatory Systems Working Group. 2008
Global Clearing and Settlement: Final Monitoring Report
Global Monitoring Committee. 2006
Reinsurance and International Financial Markets
Reinsurance Study Group. 2006
Enhancing Public Confidence in Financial Reporting
Steering & Working Committees on Accounting. 2004
Global Clearing and Settlement: A Plan of Action
Steering & Working Committees of Global Clearing & Settlements Study. 2003
Derivatives: Practices and Principles:
Follow-up Surveys of Industry Practice
Global Derivatives Study Group. 1994
Derivatives: Practices and Principles,
Appendix III: Survey of Industry Practice
Global Derivatives Study Group. 1994

Derivatives: Practices and Principles, Appendix II:
Legal Enforceability: Survey of Nine Jurisdictions
Global Derivatives Study Group. 1993
Derivatives: Practices and Principles, Appendix I: Working Papers
Global Derivatives Study Group. 1993
Derivatives: Practices and Principles
Global Derivatives Study Group. 1993
Clearance and Settlement Systems: Status Reports, Autumn 1992
Various Authors. 1992
Clearance and Settlement Systems: Status Reports, Year-End 1990
Various Authors. 1991
Conference on Clearance and Settlement Systems.
London, March 1990: Speeches
Various Authors. 1990
Clearance and Settlement Systems: Status Reports, Spring 1990
Various Authors. 1990

OCCASIONAL PAPERS

82. The 2008 Financial Crisis and Its Aftermath:
Addressing the Next Debt Challenge
Thomas A. Russo and Aaron J. Katzel. 2011
81. Regulatory Reforms and Remaining Challenges
Mark Carney, Paul Tucker, Philipp Hildebrand, Jacques de Larosière,
William Dudley, Adair Turner, and Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. 2011
80. 12 Market and Government Failures Leading
to the 2008– 09 Financial Crisis
Guillermo de la Dehesa. 2010
79. Lessons Learned from Previous Banking Crises:
Sweden, Japan, Spain, and Mexico
Stefan Ingves, Goran Lind, Masaaki Shirakawa, Jaime Caruana,
and Guillermo Ortiz Martinez. 2009
78. The G30 at Thirty
Peter Kenen. 2008
77. Distorting the Micro to Embellish the Macro: The Case of Argentina
Domingo Cavallo and Joaquin Cottani. 2008
76. Credit Crunch: Where Do We Stand?
Thomas A. Russo. 2008
75. Banking, Financial, and Regulatory Reform
Liu Mingkang, Roger Ferguson, and Guillermo Ortiz Martinez. 2007
74. The Achievements and Challenges of European Union Financial
Integration and its Implications for the United States
Jacques de Larosière. 2007
73. Nine Common Misconceptions about Competitiveness and Globalization
Guillermo de la Dehesa. 2007

57

72. International Currencies and National Monetary Policies
Barry Eichengreen. 2006
71. The International Role of the Dollar and Trade Balance Adjustment
Linda Goldberg and Cédric Tille. 2006
70. The Critical Mission of the European Stability and Growth Pact
Jacques de Larosière. 2005
69. Is it Possible to Preserve the European Social Model?
Guillermo de la Dehesa. 2005
68. External Transparency in Trade Policy
Sylvia Ostry. 2004
67. American Capitalism and Global Convergence
Marina V.N. Whitman. 2003
66. Enron et al.: Market Forces in Disarray
Jaime Caruana, Andrew Crockett, Douglas Flint, Trevor Harris, and Tom Jones. 2002
65. Venture Capital in the United States and Europe
Guillermo de la Dehesa. 2002
64. Explaining the Euro to a Washington Audience
Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa. 2001
63. Exchange Rate Regimes: Some Lessons from Postwar Europe
Charles Wyplosz. 2000
62. Decisionmaking for European Economic and Monetary Union
Erik Hoffmeyer. 2000
61. Charting a Course for the Multilateral Trading System:
The Seattle Ministerial Meeting and Beyond
Ernest Preeg. 1999
60. Exchange Rate Arrangements for the Emerging Market Economies
Felipe Larraín and Andrés Velasco. 1999
59. G3 Exchange Rate Relationships: A Recap of the
Record and a Review of Proposals for Change
Richard Clarida. 1999
58. Real Estate Booms and Banking Busts: An International Perspective
Richard Herring and Susan Wachter. 1999
57. The Future of Global Financial Regulation
Sir Andrew Large. 1998
56. Reinforcing the WTO
Sylvia Ostry. 1998
55. Japan: The Road to Recovery
Akio Mikuni. 1998
54. Financial Services in the Uruguay Round and the WTO
Sydney J. Key. 1997
53. A New Regime for Foreign Direct Investment
Sylvia Ostry. 1997

58

52. Derivatives and Monetary Policy
Gerd Hausler. 1996
51. The Reform of Wholesale Payment Systems
and Impact on Financial Markets
David Folkerts-Landau, Peter Garber, and Dirk Schoenmaker. 1996
50. EMU Prospects
Guillermo de la Dehesa and Peter B. Kenen. 1995
49. New Dimensions of Market Access
Sylvia Ostry. 1995
48. Thirty Years in Central Banking
Erik Hoffmeyer. 1994
47. Capital, Asset Risk and Bank Failure
Linda M. Hooks. 1994
46. In Search of a Level Playing Field: The Implementation of
the Basle Capital Accord in Japan and the United States
Hal S. Scott and Shinsaku Iwahara. 1994
45. The Impact of Trade on OECD Labor Markets
Robert Z. Lawrence. 1994
44. Global Derivatives: Public Sector Responses
James A. Leach, William J. McDonough, David W. Mullins, and Brian Quinn. 1993
43. The Ten Commandments of Systemic Reform
Vaclav Klaus. 1993
42. Tripolarism: Regional and Global Economic Cooperation
Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa. 1993
41. The Threat of Managed Trade to Transforming Economies
Sylvia Ostry. 1993
40. The New Trade Agenda
Geza Feketekuty. 1992
39. EMU and the Regions
Guillermo de la Dehesa and Paul Krugman. 1992
38. Why Now? Change and Turmoil in U.S. Banking
Lawrence J. White. 1992
37. Are Foreign-owned Subsidiaries Good for the United States?
Raymond Vernon. 1992
36. The Economic Transformation of East Germany:
Some Preliminary Lessons
Gerhard Fels and Claus Schnabel. 1991
35. International Trade in Banking Services: A Conceptual Framework
Sydney J. Key and Hal S. Scott. 1991
34. Privatization in Eastern and Central Europe
Guillermo de la Dehesa. 1991
33. Foreign Direct Investment: The Neglected Twin of Trade
DeAnne Julius. 1991

59

32. Interdependence of Capital Markets and Policy Implications
Stephen H. Axilrod. 1990
31. Two Views of German Reunification
Hans Tietmeyer and Wilfried Guth. 1990
30. Europe in the Nineties: Problems and Aspirations
Wilfried Guth. 1990
29. Implications of Increasing Corporate Indebtedness for Monetary Policy
Benjamin M. Friedman. 1990
28. Financial and Monetary Integration in Europe: 1990, 1992 and Beyond
Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa. 1990

60

Group of Thirty
Macroprudential Policy: Addressing the Things We Don’t Know
		

Alastair Clark
Andrew Large

Group of Thirty
1726 M Street, N.W., Suite 200
Washington, DC 20036
ISBN 1-56708-154-1

