Managing The Central Bank’s Balance Sheet: Where Monetary
Policy Meets Financial Stability
Lecture given by
Paul Tucker, Executive Director and Member of the Monetary Policy Committee of the
Bank of England

To mark the fifteenth anniversary of Lombard Street Research held in London
28 July 2004

The views expressed are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect those of either the Bank of
England or other members of the Monetary Policy Committee.
My thanks to the team that have planned the changes to the Bank’s market operations, led by David
Rule, Sarah Breeden and Niki Anderson of the Sterling Markets Division. My profound thanks to
Roger Clews, who is truly a co-author of this paper and of many of the ideas in it; and my thanks to
Kath Begley and her colleagues in the Bank’s Information Centre for archival support for Roger’s
historical research. Special thanks also to Peter Andrews, who was the first amongst us to see that
the big issue was whether to remunerate reserves. In addition to them, I am grateful for comments
from the Governor, Andrew Bailey, Charles Goodhart and, also for research support, Fergal Shortall.
And, finally, as ever, my thanks to Sandra Banister for secretarial support.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2

MANAGING THE CENTRAL BANK’S BALANCE SHEET: WHERE MONETARY
POLICY MEETS FINANCIAL STABILITY1

When, ten years ago, Mervyn King delivered a lecture to mark the fifth anniversary of Tim
Congdon’s Lombard Street Research, he reviewed ideas on the monetary transmission mechanism
and, engaging with part of Tim’s substantial contribution over many years, the role of money (and
credit) within it. These days most such accounts – including that published by the MPC2 – begin
with a simple assertion that the central bank sets the short-term nominal interest rate. And they go
on to explain how, given sticky wages and prices, that enables the central bank to shift the short-term
real interest rate in a way that either restrains or stimulates aggregate demand.3 Notice no mention
of money here. On this view of the world and, in particular, given this way of implementing
monetary policy, money – both narrow and broad – is largely endogenous. The central bank simply
supplies whatever amount of base money is demanded by the economy at the prevailing level of
interest rates. Depending on the stability of the demand for money, the monetary aggregates can be
useful indicators of what is going on in the economy,4 but they are not necessarily doing anything
causal. This apparent relegation of money in policy debates often troubles policymakers like me
who emphasise that monetary policy’s main capability is to deliver a medium-term path for nominal
variables; and it does not, in fact, logically preclude the existence of an effect working through the

1

A version of this paper was delivered to mark the fifteenth anniversary of Lombard Street Research on Wednesday 28
July 2004. The views expressed are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect those of either the Bank of England
or other members of the Monetary Policy Committee.
My thanks to the team that have planned the changes to the Bank’s market operations, led by David Rule, Sarah Breeden
and Niki Anderson of the Sterling Markets Division. My profound thanks to Roger Clews, who is truly a co-author of
this paper and of many of the ideas in it; and my thanks to Kath Begley and her colleagues in the Bank’s Information
Centre for archival support for Roger’s historical research. Special thanks also to Peter Andrews, who was the first
amongst us to see that the big issue was whether to remunerate reserves. In addition to them, I am grateful for comments
from the Governor, Andrew Bailey, Charles Goodhart and, also for research support, Fergal Shortall. And, finally, as
ever, my thanks to Sandra Banister for secretarial support.
2

“The transmission mechanism of monetary policy”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 39, pages. 161-170, May
1999.
3

4

An early account is Interest and Prices by Knut Wicksell, London: Macmillan (1898) 1936.

See, for example, “Money and credit in an inflation-targeting regime”, by Andrew Hauser and Andrew Brigden, Bank
of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 42, pages 299-307, Autumn 2002.

3

quantity of money, via liquidity and other relative risk premia etc.5 But, in any case, it should not
obscure the fact that the very first step of the transmission mechanism – setting a short-term nominal
rate – turns precisely on how we manage access to our money. There is a curious lack of interest in
how this is done; and occasionally some puzzlement. Indeed, a former Chief Economist of the Bank,
Christopher Dow, ended up concluding that it was just some miraculous convention that the banks
chose out of politeness to follow.6
Well, last week we announced plans for the biggest shake up in how we implement monetary policy
for at least a quarter of a century. I want to use today’s occasion to explain the analysis underlying
these reforms. This will involve coming clean about how compromises with the first Thatcher
government, during the monetary-base control debate of the very early 1980s, had the unfortunate
effect, albeit with a lag, of clouding the Bank’s thinking about the feasible role of Open Market
Operations in the framework for setting interest rates. On a more positive note, I shall also outline
how operationally, our monetary and financial stability roles fit together.
Managing central bank money: demand for reserves and the shape of a central bank’s balance
sheet
Both missions stem from the special nature of our liabilities: central bank money. We are able to
implement monetary policy because the economy has a demand for central bank money and, as
monopoly suppliers, we can set the terms on which we provide it. The demand for our money is
manifested in two ways – holdings of notes, and bankers’ balances with us. This reflects structural
features of the financial system and, in particular, the way risk is managed in a fractional-reserve
banking system.
Although some payments are still made using our notes, most are made in commercial bank money
(through transfers of deposits). But deposit money is subject to risk. Commercial banks are in the
business of providing liquidity insurance to their customers – via deposits withdrawable on demand
and via committed loan facilities – and, as such, are themselves inherently susceptible to liquidity

5

As discussed, for example, in Money and the economy: issues in monetary analysis by Karl Brunner and Allan H.
Meltzer, New York: Cambridge University Press, 1993. It’s just that we do not know how to identify or quantify such
elements of the transmission mechanism.

6

See A critique of monetary policy: theory and British experience by J C R Dow and I D Saville, Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1988, page 217.

4

crises. In consequence, customers want to be assured that banks can maintain convertibility into
central bank money (notes). And banks therefore have to manage their various credit and other risks,
including ‘reinsuring’ against their liquidity commitments. Second-tier banks can try to acquire such
reinsurance by paying for lines of credit from the largest banks.7 But the largest banks cannot buy
liquidity insurance from each other without incurring an unacceptable level of (contingent)
counterparty credit risk. They have to self insure, which they do by holding high-quality assets that
can be exchanged at the central bank for ‘cash’ – or, rather, for a credit to their account at the central
bank.8

That relates to the second source of demand for central bank money: bankers’ balances. For
commercial bank money to be used as a means of payment, banks have to settle transfers of deposits
amongst themselves. The big banks – ie the so-called settlement banks – settle in Bank of England
money, and to that end maintain balances with us. Why is that? If they settled in each other’s
money, the consequent credit exposures would not be controllable – intra-day or from day to day.
To avoid that, they settle payments in the ‘final settlement asset’, central bank money. This makes
the system as a whole safer. (It isn’t some newfangled thing, by the way. Since the 1770s,9 the
banks have had increasingly formal arrangements to settle the clearings in Bank of England money –
first in notes and then, from 1854 up to today, via deposits held with us.10)

These sources of demand for our money rely on two preconditions: the integrity of our balance sheet
and, in a fiat money system, a decent monetary policy. Without them, agents might drift to using
final-settlement assets which could provide an alternative unit of account for the economy. Neither
is currently a worry!

7

In the UK, this dates back to the second half of the eighteenth century when the ‘country banks’ banked with the
‘London banks’, and they banked with the Bank. The UK payment system remains tiered in that sense.
8

This is the basis of the FSA’s stock liquidity requirement for the largest UK banks, which was introduced in 1996. See
Box 4, “The sterling stock liquidity requirement”, in “Banking system liquidity management: developments and issues”
by Graeme Chaplin, Alison Emblow and Ian Michael, Financial Stability Review, Bank of England, December 2000.

9

And so well before Bank of England notes became legal tender (1833) or we were granted a monopoly on note issue
(1844).

10

The Banker’s Clearing House by P W Matthews, London: Pitman, 1921.

5

Developments in the demand for the two types of central bank money – notes and bankers’ balances
– drive the shape of our balance sheet: they comprise the bulk of our liabilities. For careful students
of the Bank, I should perhaps make it clear at this point that in what follows – and, more important,
in our analysis – Issue Department and Banking Department are treated in a completely joined up
way.11 The separation was a central feature of the 1844 Bank Charter Act, which posited that
convertibility of our notes into gold was a sufficient specification of a central bank’s role. It did not
have much merit then, amongst other things because it failed to recognise the importance of bankers’
balances; is an aberration in today’s fiat money system; and has not affected the high-level
architecture of the system we are planning.
Broadly, as the economy grows, demand for our notes increases.12 The banks have to buy the notes
from the Bank, and they draw down their balances with us to do so. But that buffer is limited and, in
consequence, they are ‘structurally short’, with the Bank having to lend to them (or buy assets from
them). At an aggregate level, we do that via open market operations (a term originating from around
a century ago).13 So, in line with double-entry book keeping!, both sides of our balance sheet expand
as the demand for our notes expands (Chart 1). For what are expected to be permanent increases in
the value of notes in issue, the central bank can in principle provide the necessary assistance – ie
inject reserves – by buying long-maturity assets, which would be done at market rates. Shorter-term
assistance rolls over more frequently, and is typically used by central banks to provide reserves at a
rate in line with the policy rate.

11

This is also reflected in the presentation of a consolidated summary balance sheet for the Bank in the Quarterly
Bulletin’s regular ‘Markets and Operations’ article, section 3, which we have tried over the past couple of years to make
more complete and transparent.

12

One recent study of the demand for notes is “Assessing the stability of narrow money demand in the United Kingdom”,
by Kathryn Grant, Gertjan Vlieghe and Andrew Brigden, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 44, pages 131-142.

13

The Bank of England 1891-1944 Volume 1 by R. S. Sayers, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1976, page 28.

6

Chart 1: Bank notes in circulation and the stock
of refinancing (a)(b)
T ot al Refinancing

£ bn

W ays and Means(c)
Not es In Circulat ion

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

N F M A N F M A N F M A N F M A N F M
1999 2000
01
02
03
04
(a)
(b)
(c)

The difference between notes and total refinancing is accounted
for by liabilities arising from bankers’ balances, the Bank’s capital,
central bank deposits etc.
Monthly averages.
An illiquid advance to HM Government. This fluctuated prior to
the transfer of responsibility for UK central government cash
management to the UK Debt Management Office in April 2000.
The Ways and Means balance is now usually constant, varying
only very occasionally.

Meanwhile, the level of end-of-day balances that bankers want to maintain with the Bank is driven
by (i) the rate we pay, which in the past has always been zero, and the rate we charge on overdrafts;
and (ii) the precision with which they can manage their payment flows over a day as a whole. The
greater their control over payment schedules, and the more effective the Bank is in ensuring that the
system as a whole is square, the smaller the end-of-day buffer the banks need in the form of balances
with the Bank. The fact that such balances are unremunerated has, in practice, provided a powerful
impetus to end-of-day payment system efficiency. The whole system now rests on the banking
system targeting aggregate balances of just £45 million (million not billion), compared with average
daily flows in the CHAPS payment system of over £150 billion (more than three thousand times
greater). So although the implementation of monetary policy does depend on banks’ demand for our
money, they don’t seem to demand very much of it! In the framework we are moving to, the
influences on the demand for notes will be unaffected, but the bankers’ balances regime will change
materially.

7

Outline of the current and new systems
Where are we moving from, and to? First the current system. Its essence14 is that the dozen or so
sterling settlement banks have to maintain non-negative balances with us at close of business each
day (the £45 million mentioned earlier). They receive no interest on positive balances, but incur a
penalty rate if overdrawn. The system needs to borrow from the Bank so that the settlement banks
can meet their target balances and, thereby, avoid the penalty charge on overdrafts. To that end, each
day we publish a forecast of the system’s shortage and undertake to make the system square (ie to
achieve the £45 million target). Open market operations (OMOs) with a two-week maturity are
conducted each day at the MPC repo rate; the stock of OMO loans outstanding has in recent years
typically been around £20-25 billion. There are two rounds of OMOs (9.45am and 2.30pm) to cater
for updates during the day to our forecast of the shortage. Towards the end of the day, there are
overnight lending and deposit facilities – broadly, for settlement banks/OMO counterparties – to be
sure that the system is ‘square’; these facilities carry penalty rates in order to induce participation in
OMOs. Not all settlement banks are OMO counterparties, and vice versa. OMOs can span MPC
dates, so we can have OMO loans outstanding which carry a different rate from that most recently
decided by the MPC.
The new system will work as follows. A broad range of banks, including all of the settlement banks
but going beyond that group, will agree to hold a specified positive balance with the Bank on
average over a maintenance period lasting from one MPC meeting to the next. The level of balances
targeted will be chosen by individual banks: voluntary reserves. For the first time in its history, the
Bank will pay interest on such reserves: at the MPC’s repo rate. The consequent demand for
reserves will be met via a weekly OMO with a maturity of one week, and a fine-tuning repo on the
final day of the maintenance period. There will be standing lending and deposit facilities available
all day to banks generally. On the final day of the maintenance period, these facilities – used if a
scheme member would otherwise under or overshoot the target – will carry rates +25bp from the
MPC’s repo rate. Earlier in the maintenance period, the penalties on the standing facilities will be
higher, perhaps +100bp. If short-term OMOs were ever to span an MPC meeting, we envisage that
the rate charged would be indexed to the MPC’s rate.

14

For more detail, see the ‘Red Book’, www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/money/stermm3.pdf.

8

All that sounds – and is – rather technical. But, compared with the past couple of decades, the plan
reflects a fundamental change in how the Bank thinks about the implementation of monetary policy
and the management of our balance sheet more generally, including how we support the stability of
the system. This will, I hope, begin to become apparent by my explaining why we need to move
away from where we are now.
Problems with the current system: the need for reform
There are three types of problem with the current framework. First, it is overly complex: the system
provides for four rounds of operations each day and on most days there are at least two. The
end-of-day arrangements are especially elaborate. Second, when the MPC is expected to change
rates, the ultra-short maturity rate structure ‘pivots’ in a rather perverse way, because the daily
2-week repos span the MPC meeting but are conducted at the existing rate.15 For all but the initiated,
this makes it harder to decipher expectations from ultra short-term money market rates.
Chart 3: Cumulative folded distributions of
overnight/policy rate spreads 2 Jan. 20028 Aug. 2003

P er cent
5

4

3

€

2

US $

1

0
J
A
2002

15

J

O

J

A
03

J

O

J

A
04

50

50

Cumulative frequency, per cent

£

£

40

60

US $
€

30

70

Int erquart ile
Range
20

80

10

90

Cumulative frequency, per cent

Chart 2: Overnight interest rates and
policy rates – UK, US and euro-area

100
0
-1.0 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Spreads, percent age point s

Arbitrage tends to make expected overnight rates over the relevant two-week period equal to the rate at which the Bank
lends in its operations. So, if the Bank lends at the MPC’s existing repo rate and pins down the market rate at that
maturity, overnight rates up to the meeting will fall below this rate if the MPC is expected to raise its rate at its next
meeting. Bidding for two-week money in the Bank’s regular OMOs also rises. Conversely, if MPC is expected to
reduce the Bank’s rate, overnight rates up to the meeting date rise and participation in the two-week operations falls.

9

And third, the overnight rate is highly volatile by international standards – from day to day, and
intra-day (Charts 2 and 3). Although it has typically not affected longer-maturity money market
rates and so has not impeded the monetary transmission mechanism,16 this volatility has troubled the
Bank for some years. It was considerably reduced by some major surgery in the mid-late 1990s
reforms (Chart 4), which eliminated the capacity of banks to ‘corner’ the limited amount of eligible
collateral then available (see Annex 1). But those reforms did not eliminate the capability of those
large sterling banks that are OMO counterparties to move the overnight rate around, typically
resulting in periods of persistent softness designed to reduce the cost of financing longer maturity
assets. This was a frequent occurrence until mid 2003 when the Bank’s concern became evident.
Chart 4: Volatility of the sterling overnight
interest rate(a)
Per cent
(b)

(c)

(d)

15

10

5
high
0

low

-5

-10
94

95

96

97

98

99

00

01

02

03

04

(a) High and low of the day observed by the Bank's dealing desk as a
spread to the policy rate.
(b) Daily gilt-repo OMOs introduced
(c) End of transition for discount houses
(d) Introduction of the deposit facility

16

See, for example, “Money market operations and volatility in UK money market rates” by Anne Vila Wetherhilt, Bank
of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 42, pages 420-429, Winter 2002.

10

Also, since the discount houses withered away in the 1980s,17 there has been less active marketmaking in overnight money. In consequence, there can be temporary frictions in the distribution of
‘reserves’ when it is not the large banks/OMO counterparties that are short but rather a range of
smaller banks. The result has been occasional tight overnight market conditions, with market rates
moving towards the Bank’s penal ‘late lending’ rates.
A number of foreign banks, securities houses, corporate treasurers and money managers have told us
that these characteristics of the sterling money markets deter their full participation. The volatility
may, for example, have impeded the development of the overnight interest-rate swap (derivative)
market relative to, say, the euro OIS market.
Less tangibly, but importantly, the reputation of the sterling money markets is impaired. How come,
some ask, that the Bank has what is regarded by many outside commentators as a state-of-the-art
monetary policy regime, is amongst the leading official institutions in financial stability analysis and
surveillance, but has such a peculiar core money market?
So we need reform.
Things were worse before the mid-late-1990s reforms. Then the Bank had to stop relying on a
moribund market (the bill market) and atrophied institutions (the discount houses); the Bank created
the gilt repo market (now with nearly £200 billion outstanding), transitioned out the discount houses,
and introduced a (wide) interest-rate corridor for the first time. We do not have an equivalent crisis
now, and we have therefore been able to step back and consider the framework more fundamentally
and in the light of our high-level objectives. We made those objectives clear in the paper we
published on 7 May (Annex 2).
Maturity of rates targeted
The primary objective is to stabilise short-term rates at the policy rate. Up to now, there has
probably been a fairly widespread perception that, by conducting OMOs at a two-week maturity, the

17

The houses existed until the late-1990s, but with their presence in the market a shadow of earlier decades. They had
been key intermediaries in the money markets since the mid-nineteenth century, when what later became known as the
clearing banks effectively outsourced their treasury management operations via holding secured deposits with the houses.
Those deposits were run up or down as the clearers had surplus or deficit liquidity. The clearing banks progressively
reclaimed their treasury function during the 1980s.

11

Bank has aimed to steer, or even set, money market rates at a two-week maturity. Prior to 1997, the
Bank’s daily OMOs routinely included outright purchases of bills out to a maturity of one month,
and occasionally three months, encouraging a perception that the Bank wished to steer rates at those
maturities. In fact, the maturity of a central bank’s OMOs and the maturity of the rate(s) it aims to
steer/set need not be bound together in that way. At times, a clear distinction does not seem to have
been made between the maturities at which the Bank sought to set rates and the maturities at which
the market rate would be determined by market expectations of the future path of the official policy
rate.18 Under monetary regimes where policy decisions were not taken and announced regularly,
such a distinction was harder to make as the horizon to the next decision was uncertain.
But whatever the validity or otherwise of the idea that the Bank was, under past regimes, using its
operations to steer rates at two-weeks, one-month or whatever, it is not what we should be doing
now. And, in truth, it has been less appropriate since the early-1990s, when in a series of steps the
authorities introduced the system of deciding and announcing the level of the official interest rate on
a regular monthly timetable. All we can, and should, do is set the interest rate up to the next MPC
meeting – a period of up to a month or so immediately after an MPC meeting, but eventually of just
one day. Beyond the next MPC meeting, money market rates should be determined by what market
participants expect the MPC to decide. Hence our objective is to have a basically flat curve, at the
MPC’s rate, out to the next MPC meeting. The market in overnight money would then be used by
banks for liquidity management but not to speculate on the rate.
Amongst other things, this means eliminating pivoting when an MPC rate change is expected. That
should be straightforward. It entails not operating at a fixed rate beyond the next MPC meeting,
which can be achieved either by simply not operating at all beyond the next MPC, or via any such
operations being at a market-determined rate or indexed to the prevailing MPC rate.19
I have not yet quite specified which market rate we are targeting. In the sterling markets, central
bank money and commercial bank money are exchangeable at par, and so one cannot identify a

18

As the archival research reported later in this paper demonstrates, for much of its history the Bank did make the
distinction. Blurring seems to have resulted from the peculiarities of the regime introduced in 1981. See below and
Annex 3.

19

The Bank provided for indexed repos over Y2K (for a description see “Sterling market liquidity over the Y2K period”,
Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 39, pages 325-326, November 1999).

12

‘market interest rate on central bank money’. Rather, we are interested in influencing, via arbitrage,
the rates on those money market instruments carrying the lowest possible credit risk, with the market
determining credit risk premia on other instruments and transactions.
In routine circumstances, the Bank is not trying directly to influence the price of assets taken as
collateral in our open market operations, which these days are effected via repo. Although
technically a purchase and resale of securities, the securities exchanged in our repos play no role in
setting policy. They are nevertheless vital, as they constitute the collateral securing the Bank’s credit
exposure to its counterparties.20
How the central bank sets rates
In terms of the overriding objective of stabilising ultra-short interest rates at the MPC’s rate, the key
is to ensure that we are both the marginal supplier and taker of ‘reserves’. In theory, there are two
possible ways of achieving this. One is to use OMOs to adjust the quantity of reserves to bring about
the desired short-term interest rate, implicitly or explicitly drawing on an identified demand
schedule. Neither in the past nor in the current review have we even briefly entertained the notion
that this is realistic.
The alternative way for the central bank to establish itself as the rate setter is to be prepared to supply
(or absorb) whatever liquidity the market demands at its chosen rate(s). The most precise way of
doing this is through so-called ‘standing facilities’ in which the central bank lends (secured)
whatever is demanded at a fixed rate or takes on deposit whatever is supplied at a fixed rate.21
This points to the underlying problems with the Bank’s current system. On their own, OMOs are not
sufficient to make the Bank the rate setter if, as now, they are used simply to offset the market’s net

20

Eligible collateral has to meet two tests. It should be high-quality, and to that end we recently supplemented our
criteria with a public ratings cut off of Aa3. And there should be plenty of it. Because we take EU government
securities, there is some £3 trillion outstanding – somewhat larger than the £20-25 billion stock of OMO lending in recent
years!

21

It is important to stress that this view of how the central bank’s rate can most expeditiously be made effective does not
entail a particular set of views about whether money is ‘special’ and thus about how policy-rate changes are transmitted
into other asset prices etc. Thus, for example, the fact that Michael Woodford advocates a narrow corridor system does
not entail that practitioners who adopt such systems also share a view that nothing would be changed if money gave no
special benefits (such as liquidity) to its holders. This is relevant to the range of policy options available at the ‘zero
bound’ (briefly discussed later in this paper). For Woodford’s analysis, see chapter 2 of his Interest and prices:
foundations of a theory of monetary policy, Princeton: Princeton University Press 2003.

13

liquidity need given a specified maintenance requirement. This is the first fundamental flaw of the
Bank’s current system. Broadly, at present a single OMO counterparty can take our money – so that
the system is square vis-à-vis the Bank – and seek to influence the market overnight rate by trading
at a different rate from the Bank’s rate (up to the boundaries formed by the current wide corridor). A
mistaken emphasis on OMOs as ‘setting the rate’, rather than on standing facilities, has been one
precondition for the volatility in the sterling overnight rate. So a first basic design principle is that a
well-constructed system involves the possibility of gross intermediation across the central bank’s
balance sheet.
Divergence of the market rate from the MPC’s rate can be caused by a maldistribution of liquidity
among institutions (accidentally so or through deliberate hoarding). If the market rate diverges from
our rate, the banks that are having to pay/receive the ‘wrong’ rate should be able to come to the
Bank. At present, however, only relatively few banks – the settlement banks and OMO
counterparties – have access to the Bank’s standing facilities. This is the second fundamental flaw of
the current system. Furthermore, the penalty on intermediating via the Bank’s balance sheet should
not be too great; otherwise ‘victim’ banks may prefer the costs of rate volatility and/or persistent
tightness or softness in rates. The rates on the Bank’s current ‘facilities’ are 200 basis points apart.
To have closer control over rates using standing facilities, the Bank’s interest rate ‘corridor’ needs to
be narrower. A second basic design principle, therefore, is that access to intermediation via the
Bank’s balance sheet needs to be widespread and at an unprohibitive price.
There are lots of ways of satisfying those basic design principles. At a high level of generality, the
Bank could be the marginal player/price setter in a system where banks actually intermediate across
our balance sheet. But we could also achieve that in a so-called ‘corridor system’ where the rates on
lending and deposit facilities provide a corridor for market rates; most intermediation occurs via the
interbank market at prices within the corridor; and ‘symmetry’, which I shall explain later, delivers a
market rate equal to the mid-point of the corridor, chosen of course to be the MPC’s rate.
Why not have a zero corridor?
The limiting case is for the Bank to give every bank access to borrow (against collateral, o/a credit
risk) or deposit in unlimited quantities overnight at the MPC’s rate, ie a zero corridor. With identical
lending and borrowing rates, there would be no (overnight) interbank market as the intermediaries
could not even recover the bid-offer spread. This would distort ultra short-term money markets, and
possibly collateral markets (because the Bank lends against high quality collateral and so at times

14

would hold large amounts of it); would cause major and unpredictable day-to-day fluctuations in the
size of our balance sheet; and apply no premium for the backstop liquidity insurance provided to
banks via the standing lending facility.22 Our preference is to design a framework that can achieve
our monetary policy/volatility objectives while leaving open the possibility of a private market in
short-term money. To achieve those goals, we do not need a system that entails that the Bank is the
only intermediary in overnight money – as overseas systems demonstrate.
Other central banks have, in fact, achieved their goals for managing central bank money in a variety
of ways. One group – the ECB, the Fed – use ‘reserve averaging’. Indeed, it has sometimes been
suggested that the fundamental flaw in the UK’s current system is that it has a one-day maintenance
period. Analytically, that is not the fundamental flaw, as I hope is clear from my earlier remarks on
OMOs. And empirically, a number of central banks – notably Australia, Canada, New Zealand –
have achieved rate stability with a same-day system (Chart 5).23

22

Also, the absence of a private market would potentially create scope for predatory behaviour by the clearing banks, qua
bankers, towards other firms – securities dealers, corporate treasurers, investment firms – that bank with them, would not
have access to the Bank, and have to manage a daily liquidity surplus or deficit. It is conceivable that there would be
enough such firms for a market to exist but, unless there were active intermediaries, the search costs might be high.

23

Comparing the US and (inter alia) New Zealand systems, Woodford (“Monetary policy in the information economy” in
Economic policy for the information economy, Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2001), argues that
same-day narrow-corridor systems are superior because they do not rely on the ability of banks to defer meeting their
liquidity needs from one day to the next. In the US system, this ‘deferral’ capability is limited by virtue of reserve
requirements being low; improvements in technology have enabled the banks gradually to reduce the level of reserves
they are required to hold – a trend Woodford, like others, expects to continue. His paper does not, however, consider the
possibility of attracting high levels of bankers’ balances via a system of voluntary reserves remunerated at the official
policy rate, combined with standing facilities that create a narrow corridor on just the final day of the maintenance
period.

15

Chart 5: Overnight interest rates and policy
rates – Canada, Australia and New Zealand
P er cent
6

NZ$

Au s$

5

4

3

2

Can$

1
J
A
2002

J

O

J

A

J

O

03

J

A
04

The Bank’s new system will involve both. Rates will be set at the MPC’s rate using the technology
of a same-day narrow-corridor system. But by employing averaging, we should need a narrow
corridor to steer rates only once every so often, not every day.
Averaging and the smoothing the overnight rate
In an averaging system, a member bank has to maintain a required level of reserves on average over
the maintenance period. During the maintenance period, banks are free to draw on or build up their
balance at the central bank in order to meet the average required over the period. Such day-to-day
fluctuations attract no penalty, so there is in effect no ‘turn’. In principle, market rates are smoothed
– a martingale is established24 – by scheme banks varying their balances with the central bank rather
than borrowing/lending in the market whenever the market rate diverges from their central
expectation of the market rate that will prevail on the final day of the maintenance period; that is, the
rate at which they expect to be able to ‘square’ up to meet their reserves target by lending or
borrowing in the market on the final day. In consequence, averaging in principle establishes a flat
curve through the maintenance period, with the rate expected on the final day fed back to earlier days
via arbitrage. That leaves the central bank with the task of establishing its rate on the final day of the

24

In other words, the overnight rate on any day corresponds to the expected overnight rates on the following days of the
same maintenance period.

16

maintenance period, so that the flat curve is at the central bank’s rate not some other rate. It is the
same task as in a same-day maintenance system.25 And it is also why most averaging systems
exhibit UK-style volatility on their final day (Chart 6). But we believe that should be avoidable, by
employing the technology of the best same-day systems.

Chart 6: Overnight interest rates in the Euro area during 2003
p er cent
3.5
3.0

2.5
2.0
EONIA
1.5

M inimum bid rate
M arginal Allotment Rate(a)

1.0
Jan
(a)

M ar

M ay

Jul

Sep

Nov

In the ECB’s Main Refinancing Operation.

Setting the interest rate via a narrow corridor
Narrow-corridor systems not only put bounds on market rates, they also influence where rates will be
within the corridor. Provided the banking system as a whole is square, the excess balances of ‘long’
banks by definition offset the deficit balances of ‘short’ banks. The former face a choice between
lending in the market or depositing their excess with the central bank at a discount (say 25bp) to the
official repo rate. The latter, ‘short’ banks face a choice between borrowing in the market or from
the central bank at a premium (say 25bp) to the official repo rate. The cost of using the facilities
depends on where the market rate is within the corridor. If, for example, the market rate were above

25

An earlier Bank analysis of averaging focused on rate smoothing and did not address how the central bank should
establish its rate on the final day of the maintenance period. See Haydn Davis, Averaging in a framework of zero reserve
requirements: implications for the operation of monetary policy, Bank of England Working Paper No 84.

17

the mid-point of the corridor, it would be relatively expensive to use the deposit facility but cheaper
to use the borrowing facility, so banks would be more willing to run the risk of being short. They
would, therefore, lend more in the market, which would tend to soften the market rate, helping to
bring it back towards the middle of the corridor.
Somewhat more exactly, the pre-conditions for such symmetry are (i) central bank operations being
expected to offset, with balanced risks, the market’s net quantity shortage/surplus relative to the
maintenance requirement; (ii) a market that distributes reserves efficiently; and (iii) genuine
symmetry in using the two standing facilities, including no ‘shame’ in using the borrowing facility.26
In the Bank’s new framework, the first of these conditions will be met via OMOs (made easier,
possibly, by expressing the maintenance requirement as a small range). To help meet condition (ii)
we plan to have a narrow corridor on the final day of the maintenance period. In theory, symmetry is
consistent with a corridor of any width. In practice, nearly all such systems have a narrow corridor
(+ 25 bp). That is what we plan to employ. A narrow corridor will reduce the returns from any
efforts to drive the market rate away from its midpoint. It will also reduce the cost to any potential
victim banks of taking defensive action by using the Bank’s standing facilities rather than the market
to square their books, which would reduce the incentive for other banks to try to influence the market
rate in the first place.
This kind of system has been used to great effect by New Zealand, Australia and Canada (Chart 7).
Like setting policy in terms of interest rates rather than base money (‘i’ rather than ‘m’), and
inflation targeting, its basis has since been set out formally by the academic community.27 As
Keynes might perhaps have said, academic economists are often the scrupulous tidiers up after some
obscure practitioner in a small country (in this case, Antipodean).

26

As has traditionally been thought to attach to the use of the Federal Reserve’s discount window. Condition (iii) cannot
be completely satisfied as the central bank requires collateral to cover loans. In a narrow sense, it could be made
symmetric if the central bank were to provide collateral against deposits. But that opens up the possibility of such a
facility being used as a general-collateral stock lending facility (as occasionally happened in the UK between 2001 and
mid-2003).
27

See, for example, Woodford (2001), op. cit. The New Zealand system was first described in “Monetary policy
implementation: changes to operating procedures” and “A cash rate system for implementing monetary policy” by David
Archer, Andy Brookes and Michael Reddell, Reserve Bank Bulletin Vol. 62, pages 46-50 and 51-61, respectively, 1999.

18

Chart 7: Cumulative folded distributions of
overnight/policy rate spreads
50

50
AUS $

40

60

CAN $
NZ $

30

70

Int erquart ile
Range
20

80

10

90

Cumulative frequency, per cent

Cumulative frequency, per cent

£

100
0
-1.0 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
P ercent age point s [sample period: 2 Jan 2002 - 08 Aug 2003]

Remunerated reserves and the scope for averaging
So the Bank of England’s new system will employ both a narrow corridor and averaging. But how
will we ensure that there is ‘enough’ averaging for the martingale to hold? The banking system’s net
liquidity need is affected not only by the Bank’s monetary operations but also by all the other flows
between us and the market, not all of which are directly controlled (notably the ebb and flow of bank
notes, which the Bank supplies on demand) – these are generally referred to by central banks as
‘autonomous factors’. In order to prevent scheme banks’ balances at the Bank going into overdraft,
another part of the Bank’s balance sheet must adjust in a way that offsets movements in these
autonomous factors. In principle, there are two ways of delivering this. Either the central bank
conducts OMOs with sufficient frequency and size to offset autonomous flows that would otherwise
put the banking system into overdraft. That is the Bank’s current approach and, in effect, that of the
Federal Reserve, which conducts OMOs most days. Alternatively, the central bank has to ensure that
the aggregate reserves held with it are sufficient to absorb the largest foreseeable fluctuations in
autonomous factors. We are adopting the second approach, which is also employed by the ECB.
For that reason we will pay the repo rate on reserves. In a system of voluntary reserves, anything
less could lead to material fluctuations in demand depending on how our remuneration rate compared
to the return on other asset classes. Since the cost of obtaining the reserves via OMOs will also be
the MPC’s repo rate, the demand will in theory be unlimited. We will therefore apply ceilings –

19

possibly expressed as a percentage of so-called ‘eligible liabilities’28, and set at a level that, in
aggregate, can absorb the volatility of the autonomous flows.
I should also probably note that by fully remunerating reserves, there is no tax on the banking
system. There is not, therefore, the tiniest residue of schemes used elsewhere in the past designed to
put a wedge between deposit and loan rates and so control monetary growth by raising the cost of
bank intermediation.
OMOs, and the Bank’s balance sheet
It is important to be clear about what OMOs will and won’t be doing in the new set up. As now, they
will not be used to inject a quantity of reserves according to a plan for the path of the monetary base.
And they will not be used directly to adjust the quantity of base money to bring about the desired
level of short-term interest rates. In other words, base money comprises neither a target nor an
instrument of policy.
Rather, the role of OMOs will be to satisfy the system’s targeted level of reserves over the
maintenance period as a whole.29 To that end, there will be a weekly repo which, reflecting feedback
during the consultative period, will be for a one-week maturity. In addition, we plan to conduct a
round of overnight OMOs as a matter of routine on the final day of the maintenance period, which
will allow us to adjust for any changes in our forecast of the system’s position (relative to the
maintenance requirement) between the last weekly OMO and the end of the maintenance period.
This routine fine-tuning operation is one novel feature of our plan. All short-term repos will, as now,
be at the MPC’s rate. That is for clarity. Technically, the rate could be determined by a tender, but
we wish to rule out speculation about whether the result of a tender revealed anything about the
MPC’s rate intentions.

28

Broadly, a measure of the size of a bank’s sterling balance sheet after netting out interbank deposits. Interestingly, the
regime applying between 1971 and 1981 allowed the London clearing banks to maintain their target operational balances
(1½% of eligible liabilities) on average over a month. This did not fit especially well with a regime in which, it seems,
the Bank aimed to conduct OMOs each day.

29

Interestingly, the ECB initially gave primacy to OMOs in describing their operations (‘pivotal role in steering interest
rates’), even though it would seem that that is only part of the story (The monetary policy of the ECB, 2001, page 65).

20

These proposed changes – and, in particular, the introduction of remunerated reserves to absorb
fluctuations in the ‘autonomous factors’ during the maintenance period – will, therefore, affect the
frequency of our OMOs, which have been daily for as long as anyone can remember. The official
Bank historians report that, since the 1890s at least, the Bank placed great weight on being close to
market conditions. 30 That remains as true as ever – not just of the sterling money markets but of
financial markets generally, as the Governor recently underlined when discussing our Market
Intelligence function.31 To my mind, being ‘in’ markets frequently can aid intelligence-gathering if
the activity is discretionary. By contrast, both today’s OMOs, and those under the new system, are
mechanical, and so conducting OMOs each day does not of itself yield intelligence. We do not,
therefore, think that moving to weekly OMOs should impair the flow of intelligence to the Bank; and
we shall take great efforts to stay in touch with all parts of the market so that it doesn’t.
The introduction of remunerated reserves will, though, bring changes. In particular, it will almost
certainly cause the Bank’s balance sheet to grow. Rather than the £45 million currently held, we
envisage that the banking system will hold sufficient reserves to absorb the autonomous factors –
measured in terms of billions of pounds (at least).
Other things being equal, this would simply get added to the current £20-25 billion of refinancing,
provided via OMOs, which offsets the banking sector’s structural short position. In fact, we will
need to consider whether it will be more sensible to separate the provision of reserves needed to meet
the reserves target from the offsetting of the system’s longer-term short position resulting,
essentially, from secular growth in the note issue. It may be that part of the latter could be injected
via longer-term lending, say through the purchase of longer-term government securities. The Bank
would be a rate-taker in any such official operations, which would be akin to the Federal Reserve’s
purchases of long-maturity Treasury bonds (sometimes known as ‘coupon passes’). We will, of
course, consult the market on this (if we take it forward at all). The point of mentioning it here is to
make clear that, once one separates the concept of OMOs from rate setting, it is no longer axiomatic

30

“The Bank had by 1890 concluded [that] the first condition for adequate influence was that the relationship between
the Bank and the market should have the closeness that is consequent on frequent mutual business” (Sayers, 1976, op. cit,
page 33).

31

In the Governor’s Mansion House speech, 16 June 2004, page 3, available at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches/speech222.pdf.

21

that all official market operations should be at very short maturities. What is axiomatic is that the
framework will be clear and transparent.
The ‘classical’ system; and why did we later think OMOs could set interest rates?
The role of OMOs in our plans marks a big departure from the system employed in various
manifestations since 1980, which appears to have relied on OMOs to set rates. But, at least as
employed, they can’t. This has prompted us to examine how this state of affairs came about.
For most of its history the Bank did have a coherent system for setting rates, and understood
perfectly well how it worked. From around the 1890s to the 1970s, the Bank employed what was
generally referred to as a “classical” system, with a somewhat penal Bank Rate which was “made
effective” from time to time by putting the market “into the Bank”. Open market operations were
conducted at market rates and were used to offset the autonomous factors – or not so used, leaving
the market short and so forcing it to borrow at Bank Rate, thereby making the Bank the marginal
supplier. Until 1981, the Bank did not publish a forecast of the system’s shortage, and so market
participants could not easily judge when, through its operations, the Bank had squared the system for
the day. The Bank, which therefore had all the cards, thought of itself as controlling market rates by
adjusting the scale or probability of market borrowing at Bank Rate. The rates on OMOs had no
special significance. As Deputy Governor Harvey put it in an opening statement to the Macmillan
Committee in 1930:
“ .. we regard the Bank Rate [lending] as our principal weapon for carrying [that] policy into
effect ….. open market operations .. are merely part of the machinery by which the weapon of
the Bank Rate is made efficient.”32
In 1959, Lord O’Brien and Sir Jasper Hollom – later respectively Governor and Deputy Governor
but then Chief Cashier and Deputy Chief Cashier – explained the system in the same way to the
Radcliffe Committee. Some of the key exchanges are set out in Annex 3 but, looking ahead to what
I shall have to say about how our operational framework relates to financial stability, it is convenient
to note here the sense in which Lord O’Brien referred to ‘lender of last resort’: “Acting as lender of

32

Minutes of evidence taken before the committee on finance and industry, vol. 2 London: HM Stationery Office, 1931,
page 173.

22

last resort, it is at Bank Rate. The other method, of buying in bills is …. putting out cash in
exchange for securities.”
The classical system described by Harvey and O’Brien was based on what might be called ‘half a
corridor’. Our reform plans are, therefore, in some respects a descendent of the classical system. We
too propose to use OMOs simply to steer the quantities, and hence the probability that the market
will find itself using penal facilities. But there are differences. We will not be leaving the market
guessing as to whether or not we will supply sufficient liquidity to make the market square: we will
offset the autonomous factors. And our new system will work by aiming to have the market rate in
the middle of the corridor rather than, as in the classical system, by occasionally forcing the market
rate to the (upper) edge of the corridor.
But the crucial point is that the ancien regime knew what it was doing, and didn’t imagine that the
OMOs set rates. Given the strength of induction in the Bank, where one generation learns in a
critical way from another,33 this makes the ensuing regime hard to fathom – at first sight.
Part of the answer lies in the political economy, and ideological monetarism, of the 1970s and early
1980s; and part in not adapting the framework to a profoundly altered overall monetary regime
during the 1990s.
In separate acts of folly a quarter of a century or so ago, the monetary authorities sought to hide the
fact that they were setting rates. In the 1970s, Minimum Lending Rate (MLR) replaced Bank Rate.
This was not just relabelling, as MLR was supposed to float with market-determined Treasury bill
rates, not least because that would disguise the hand of the authorities behind a tightening of credit
conditions if they wanted to restrain demand. In the 1980s, a welcome emphasis on monetary
variables was fallaciously argued by some to entail that policy should be implemented via a path for
the monetary base, with the outcome being a messy compromise. In both episodes OMOs came to
have greater apparent significance because, with Bank Rate/MLR downgraded, the authorities

33

Lord O’Brien joined the Bank in 1927 and so served under both Montagu Norman and Harvey. The Executive
Director under whom the current Markets area senior management first learned about the Bank’s official operations was
Tony Coleby, who worked in the money markets area during O’Brien and Hollom’s Governorship and Deputy
Governorship. Coleby’s 1982 paper on the Bank’s operations (see Annex 3) made clear that “until recently ….., the
operational technique for giving effect to official interest rate objectives has stayed close to the classical model” (my
emphasis).

23

sometimes used the rates in a round of OMOs to institute – that is, to signal – a change in the market
rate desired by policymakers.
The system introduced in the early 1980s after the debate on monetary base control was a
particularly unfortunate aberration – rightly described by Charles Goodhart as “confused and silly”,34
but regarded by Bank officials at the time as the best compromise they could reach given government
policy that it should be consistent with transitioning to monetary base control. The resulting
implementation framework was somehow meant to correct for a failure in decision-making (the “bias
to delay” in tightening monetary conditions in the face of incipient inflationary pressures).
Specifically, it aimed to reduce official influence on market rates but without actually switching to
monetary base control. In its OMOs, the Bank was to respond to market bids, and the so-called ‘stop
rate’ was supposed to be no more and no less than the outcome of market clearing (although, in fact,
there was an undisclosed range of acceptable stop rates agreed with the Chancellor of the
Exchequer). Even when, from November 1982, it was made clear that the authorities were, after all,
deciding the rate, the mechanics were left largely unchanged. In principle, the Bank was still
responding to market bids, setting a rate (by lending at MLR) only intermittently.
Because the logic of the actual system was so obscure, when economists wanted to conceptualise
what was going on, they used simple text-book style models. This is nicely illustrated by Chart 8,35
which seeks to make a straightforward point about the choice between controlling the price or
quantity of our money. When demand for money shifts from AA* to BB*, either the extra demand is
accommodated at an unchanged interest rate (X) or, alternatively, the price (interest rate) must rise to
Y if supply is held fixed at Z. Since the Bank knew it was not operating MBC (fixing the quantity of
money at Z), we had to be in the rate-setting version of the model, and so we had to be the marginal
supplier of ‘cash’ at our chosen rate. There are many problems with this story. First, the Bank was,
in fact, targeting a fixed (but adjustable) level of reserves (bank balances with us ) – so we were,
somehow, controlling both the rate and the quantity! Second, even when notes as well as bankers’
balances are taken into account, we know that we can change the policy rate without having directly
and immediately to alter the quantity of central bank money. Related to that, a further problem with

34

“The Bank of England over the last 35 Years” by Charles Goodhart in Bankhistorisches Archiv, Beih. 43, Welche
Aufgaben muß eine Zentralbank wahrnehmen: historische Erfahrungen und europäische Perspektiven, 2004, page 49.

35

From “The Operational Role of the Bank of England’” by Charles Goodhart, Economic Review Vol 2., pages 23-27,
May 1985.

24

the set up is that the demand for central bank money depends not simply on the absolute level of the
short-term risk-free interest rate but on where it is relative to the expected returns on other assets (the
opportunity cost), which themselves may not be independent of monetary policy.
Chart 8: The banks’ demand for cash
Interest rates
A

B

Y

X
A*
Z

B*
Quantity of money

The Bank’s thinking had, moreover, drifted into blurring the distinction between OMOs and standing
facilities, except that the Bank thought of OMOs as modern and market-friendly. And, most
important, because – as economists – we knew we ought to be supplying marginal liquidity at our
chosen rate, we slipped into thinking that that was – surely had to be – what we were actually doing.
So, ipso facto, the OMOs were setting rates.
Against that background, it is interesting that the original operational plans for the 1996-98 reforms
(described in Annex 1) did, in fact, retain the insights of the classical model, with a recognition that
there might be conditions in which the Bank would need to leave some of the system shortage
unrelieved by the daily OMOs, forcing the market into the late lending window, in order “to ensure
that the Bank is – and is known to be – the marginal supplier of liquidity …, preventing banks
seeking to substitute themselves”.36 In the event, this discretion has not been exercised, in order to
avoid the risk of any such actions being perceived, mistakenly, to convey signals about monetary

36

See Annex 3.

25

policy. Quite separately from debates about OMOs, the UK moved to a monetary regime where
signals via the Bank’s operations were not needed and, indeed, would be counterproductive. Our
reform plans have been developed with that in mind, and so with the aim that the framework itself
should stabilise the market rate in the middle of the corridor rather than relying on the Bank’s ability
to take the rate to the corridor’s edges.
Monetary regimes and implementation frameworks
Discussion of the classical system, introduced when the UK was on the gold standard; of the
confusion sown by the debate about monetary-base control; and of the redundancy of using
operations to signal policy in a world where the policy rate is periodically decided and announced
and where policy makers’ view of the monetary transmission mechanism and their reaction function
are transparently communicated – all of this might imply that there has been a clear and robust
relationship between the authorities’ overall monetary regime and the framework for implementing
policy. In fact, that does not appear to be the case, judging from Chart 9. Much the same has been
found by others.37

37

See, for example, “Instruments, procedures and strategies of monetary policy: an assessment of possible relationships
for 21 OECD countries” by J. Swank and L. van Velden in Implementation and tactics of monetary policy, BIS
Conference Papers, Vol. 3, pages 1-12, 1997.

26

Chart 9: Monetary regimes and implementation frameworks
MACRO FRAMEWORK
External

IMPLEMENTATION
Internal

Framework

Varieties

Sep-45

Dec-58
Jun-69

£ inconvertibility

Nov-51

£ pegged
to $

Exchange control

Aug-47

Inactive

Lending
guidance
and ceilings

Active
DCE
target

Classical
system

Sep-71

Competition and credit Control

Oct-72
Dec-73
Jul-76
Aug-77
May-78
Nov-79

MLR linked to T bill rates

Jul-72

Jun-80
Aug-81
Jan-82
May-87
Shadow
the DM

Broad
or broad
and
narrow
monetary
targets

“Floating”
interest rates
Unpublished
band and its
mutations

Mar-88
Oct-90
ERM
Sep-92

Mar-97
May-97

Inflation
target with
monetary
monitoring
ranges
Inflation
target

Operate
at repo
rate

Intermittent
use of corset

27

This is puzzling. The classical system – of daily OMOs, with the options of forcing market rates up
to Bank Rate and of changing Bank Rate between the Court’s weekly meetings38 – does seem
reasonably well suited to the gold standard regime, with its threat of external drain. The market rate
sometimes needed to be adjusted at short notice ‘with the object either of preventing gold from
leaving the country, or of attracting gold to the country’.39 Consistent with this, Governor Norman
and his colleagues are recorded as having pored over the gold position every day.
In theory at least, the same goes for any external money anchor, such as the ERM. It is striking that
when the UK joined the ERM in 1990, a good deal was made of its not implying a significant change
in the way monetary policy was set or implemented. It could be argued that the overnight rate
needed to move to whatever level was needed to stay in the ERM band, and a daily maintenance
system should, in principle, have facilitated that. In fact, that was not how policy was operated,
reflecting the UK authorities’ stress on the ultimate objectives of policy rather than the intermediate
means of pursuing them provided by the ERM. By contrast, various other ERM members did base
their policy framework on being able to influence their exchange rate via very close control of ultrashort-term market interest rates – but some of them had averaging schemes, which on the face of it
might have afforded them relatively little day-to-day purchase on the overnight rate.40
The overall historical picture is not especially coherent. I suggest that the question of whether,
desirably or even optimally, there might be some mapping from monetary regimes to operating
frameworks warrants research by the academic community.
In one respect, however, the evolution of the Bank’s operating system does seem to have tracked the
evolution of the overall monetary regime – the precision with which rates are set. This is another area
where more research would be useful but some preliminary propositions can be advanced, if only to
be knocked down. My impression from Chart 10 is that during the 1920s the Bank was fairly
relaxed about the spread between Bank Rate and the market rate; that during the 1930s and the early

38

Known as ‘a Governor’s rise’, which would be confirmed at the next meeting of Court (see Sayers, op. cit., page 28).

39

Interviews on the banking and currency systems, Senate document 405, Washington: National Monetary Commission,
1910, page 26. The NMC was the body that recommended the establishment of the Federal Reserve System.

40

In some cases, e.g. France, the averaging cushion had been reduced, enabling them to have greater influence over
ultra-short-maturity rates via OMOs.

28

1950s,41 when monetary policy was assigned a minimal role in macroeconomic management, the
spread could at times be measured in terms of percentage points; and through the 1960s, when direct
credit controls were employed, the authorities seem also to have been fairly indifferent to the range
between maximum and minimum market rates. I have already touched on the peculiarities of the
1970s and the early 1980s. During the 1990s, and more recently, we have become more concerned
about the relationship between official and market rates. I conjecture, but cannot yet demonstrate,
that these patterns have something to do with the monetary regime of the day.
Chart 10: Bank Rate and overnight interest rates
per cent
9
Average daily
maximum 'overnight

8
7

rate'(a)

6
5

Bank rate

4
3
2

Average daily minimum
'overnight rate'(a)

1
0

1923

1926

1929

1932

1935

1950

1953

1956

1959

1962

1965

1968

1971

(a) For the pre-war period, the average daily maximum and minimum ‘overnight rates’ are monthly averages of the highest and
lowest daily rates of interest charged on day-to-day loans in London. For the post war period, they reflect the range of rates charged
by London clearing banks for loans to the discount market on the last Friday of every month.

What is clear is that in our current monetary regime, we need precision. To date, the smallest change
in the MPC’s rate has been 25bp and members of the Committee each spend a great deal of time
deciding the level of rates we individually want rounded to the nearest 25bp. The Bank’s operating
framework needs to deliver that precision. The new framework will make that apparent through the
overnight rate. But, as a matter of routine, we revisit the policy rate once a month not every day.
Reserve averaging seems well-suited to such a regime.
So perhaps at long last, we are planning an operating framework that matches the overall regime.

41

There is a gap in the data during World War II.

29

Velocity shocks and standing facilities
This brings me to the connections between the framework for implementing monetary policy, and
financial stability. Here too, our planned changes should bring some significant improvements.
A key financial stability concern is to ensure that the central bank can meet increases in demand for
reserves that are either system-wide or, depending on the cause, from individual banks. Either may
be needed to avoid a banking system panic having systemic effects: as part of our responsibilities for
providing the economy’s final settlement asset, we need to be prepared to expand our balance sheet
when commercial banks might otherwise be under pressure to contract theirs. 42 Neither need
interfere with monetary policy. Indeed, it is important that a system-wide increase in the demand for
reserves should be accommodated in order to keep interest rates stable (it is akin to a velocity
shock).43 And idiosyncratic increases in demand can be offset through adjustments to the (net)
provision or withdrawal of reserves to/from the rest of the system via routine operations. A welldesigned framework will cater for this. The current UK system does not do so as effectively as it
might.
First, it makes no provision for the banking system as a whole routinely to change the level of
reserves that it wants to hold – except via banks acquiring more Bank of England notes from us to
hold in their tills. Technically, we could increase the targeted level of end-of-day balances; and we
can, of course, always simply inject reserves – ‘excess’ to the maintenance requirement – by buying
securities. But there is no routine mechanism for the settlement banks themselves to seek such an

42

It turns out that this was anticipated in the early nineteenth century by Thornton. In a crucial passage, he argued that
“…. to allow of some special, though temporary, increase [in the total amount of paper issued] in the event of any
extraordinary alarm or difficulty …. this seems [inter alia] to be the true policy of the directors of an institution
circumstanced like that of the Bank of England”. See An enquiry into the nature and effects of the paper credit of Great
Britain, by Henry Thornton, 1802, edited with and introduction by F A von Hayek, New York: Rinehart, 1937. Similar
points were emphasised by the Banking School forty years later; see Studies in the Theory of International Trade by
Jacob Viner, New York: Harper, 1937 for an overview.

43

Meeting an extraordinary large and sudden demand for liquidity may be needed to prevent the overnight rate diverging
from the policy rate, for example going to the top of the interest-rate corridor. It certainly does not, of itself, entail that
the overnight rate must go to zero (or close to zero), as happened during the Federal Reserve’s response to 9/11. In crisis
conditions, however, the central bank may know that there is a big increase in the demand for reserves without knowing
how big, and accordingly err on the side of over provision rather than under provision. If, ex post, there is
over-provision, the overnight rate will tend to fall to the bottom of the corridor formed by the rate on any standing
deposit facility – or to zero if there is no such facility, as in the Federal Reserve’s system for example. In theory a central
bank with both borrowing and deposit facilities could narrow its corridor for the overnight rate in such circumstances, in
order to preserve an overnight rate in line with its policy rate.

30

increase and they may well be deterred from doing so by the lack of remuneration. The new
framework will improve on this in a number of ways. Individual banks – and so the banking system
in aggregate – will be able periodically to adjust the level of reserves they are targeting. And, during
a maintenance period, they will if necessary be able to hold excess reserves.
In terms of idiosyncratic demand-for-money shocks, we currently have specific machinery for
routine liquidity provision (against high-quality collateral) only to the settlement banks (and, for part
of the day, OMO counterparties); no other banks have a routinely available mechanism to borrow
against collateral from the Bank (even at a penal rate).44 Furthermore, the overnight lending facility
is available only up to the Bank’s forecast of the system’s residual net shortage (relative to the daily
maintenance requirement) after the OMOs. As well as these design faults impeding the achievement
of a stable overnight rate in the ways described earlier, they may at the margin hinder a smooth
response to stressed conditions. Other central banks have penal collateralised Lombard facilities (or
‘discount windows’) in place for all banks all of the time. Our new framework will have this feature.
But period averaging permits a useful refinement. On the final day of the maintenance period, the
corridor will be +25bp around the repo rate, but earlier in the maintenance period the rate charged
can be more penal.
Partly because the way in which banks manage their liquidity affects the payment system and the
routine demand for our reserves, and partly because the Bank might be called upon to supply
emergency liquidity support (outside of our standard operational framework45), we have a legitimate
interest in the way that liquidity is managed by banks and across the system as a whole. Other things
being equal, our aim is to have a framework that encourages disciplined private sector liquidity
monitoring and management, as a contribution to reducing the likelihood of central bank emergency

44

In fact, as recorded by Tony Coleby in a 1982 address to mark the centenary of the Bills of Exchange Act (“Bills of
exchange: current issues in a historical perspective”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 22, pages 514-518,
December 1982), in the nineteenth century: “The Bank for its part came to understand that access to its lending facilities
was a valuable privilege. Consequently, it had the problem of how to retain these facilities (and thus underpin confidence
in the financial system) without giving the privileged institutions the ability to on-lend more easily and cheaply than
those without access to them. The Bank’s conclusion was to concentrate its lending facilities on the discount houses
because they did not compete with the banks for overdrafts or other lending business …. .” In the planned new
framework, the opposite solution will be adopted – widening access to the standing facilities to banks generally.

45

See the Memorandum of Understanding between HM Treasury, the Bank of England and the Financial Services
Authority, available at www.bankofengland.co.uk/legislation/mou.pdf. Discretionary support operations are discussed in
“The pursuit of financial stability” LSE lecture by Governor George, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin February 1994,
pp 60-66.

31

intervention. That points to not giving the banks such easy/cheap access to central bank liquidity as
to cause their own front-office/treasury liquidity-management capabilities to atrophy or market
disciplines to be eroded. And that, in turn, points to ‘discount window’ lending being available only
at penal rates, perhaps +100bp relative to repo (and to overdrafts being more penal still, as a bank in
overdraft has failed to manage its liquidity during the day).
A final point needs to be added about standing facilities and the Bank’s financial stability mandate.
For at least thirty years, and probably longer, academic economists and other commentators have
debated whether routine LOLR lending (to clearly solvent banks) should be effected via OMOs
rather than via the discount window (or standing facilities), arguing that such lending should be made
available only to clearly sound banks and that bilateral lending is therefore not needed: OMOs are
sufficient.46 The part of the argument about lending only to sound banks is irrelevant here as our
routine operations are with counterparties that can pledge high-quality collateral. But the argument
that only OMOs are needed to meet the liquidity needs of manifestly sound banks is flawed. In the
first place, in stressed conditions with widespread nervousness about counterparty risk, a sound bank
may create unwarranted apprehension about its position if, because of (actual or perceived) problems
elsewhere, it is unusually short of funds and attempts to borrow unusually large amounts in the
market, even against collateral. It can avoid risking that unnecessarily adverse reaction by using the
central bank’s standing facility, paying the penalty rate. The central bank does not need an
informational advantage; and, because it is not itself vulnerable to a run, it is not induced to overreact
as a consequence of needing to preserve reserves to maintain the integrity of its own balance sheet.
Separately, and I believe decisively, the argument makes the rather splendid assumption that the
money markets are always open and functioning properly. The tragic events of 9/11 underline that
that cannot be guaranteed.47 OMOs rely on markets to distribute liquidity to where it is needed.

46

See, for example, “Financial deregulation, monetary policy and central banking” by Marvin Goodfriend and Robert G.
King, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review, Vol. 74, pages 3-22, 1988; and “The Misuse of the Fed’s
Discount Window” by Anna Schwartz, Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis Review, September/October, pp 58-69, 1992.

47

See, for example, “Liquidity effects of the events of September 11, 2001”, by James J. McAndrews and Simon M.
Potter, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, Vol. 8, pages 59-79, November 2002.

32

Lending facilities can do the job directly – quite apart from being needed to provide a corridor for
rate setting.48
In short, the Bank’s new system, with better-designed standing facilities, will better support both our
monetary and financial stability missions.
In doing so, it will take us further in the direction of Bagehot’s precept49 that, so far as possible,
central banks should make clear in advance their preparedness to advance liquidity, against collateral
and at a penal rate, in stressed conditions. Since Bagehot’s day, a lot of the central bank lending that
was then discretionary has become ‘hard coded’ in to the operating framework. As was clear from
the remark of Chief Cashier O’Brien I quoted earlier, that was true of the old ‘late lending’ window
for the discount houses; and it is true, today, of the lending facilities for the settlement banks. The
new system’s standing facilities will improve on those arrangements in the way I have described.
From time to time, there will be transient effects on the size of our balance sheet. In the current set
up, the net provision of reserves pretty well always equals the gross provision, because the scale of
our operations is typically limited by our forecast of the system’s net shortage. But that will not be
axiomatic in the new world, where gross provision could diverge from net provision by virtue of the
standing facilities being used. We see no difficulty with that.
The Bank’s market operations, the wholesale payments system, and financial stability
Both those points – about ‘hard coding’ lending facilities and fluctuations in our balance sheet –
already apply during the day by virtue of our provision of intra-day liquidity to the settlement bank
members of the real-time gross-settlement (RTGS) wholesale payment system. All of our RTGS
lending is bilateral, and so gross. As a result, our balance sheet is bigger during the day than at the
close of business (Chart 11). This is all in the cause of avoiding massive daylight credit exposures

48

For the stability of the system, it is vital that we should be able to manage liquidity even in circumstances where, for
example, a business-continuity problem or disaster has knocked out the European time-zone settlement systems. We
therefore recently announced that, in exceptional circumstances affecting the infrastructure or firms, we will be prepared
to take US Treasury bonds as collateral.
49

Lombard Street: a description of the money market, by Walter Bagehot, New York: Scribner Armstrong, 1873, page
71.

33

amongst the settlement banks as part of their payments business, while absolutely minimising the
Bank’s credit risk (by taking high-quality collateral, via intra-day repos).
Chart 11: Intra-day liquidity and the stock of
refinancing
£ bn

Addit ional int ra-day liquidit y post ed(b)
Int ra-day liquidit y ut ilised(c)
T ot al Refinancing
W ays and Means(d)

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

M
2002

J

S

D

03

M

J

S

D

04

M

(a) Monthly averages.
(b) Monthly average of maximum intra-day liquidity posted in CHAPS
sterling less maximum intra-day liquidity utilised.
(c) Monthly average of each day’s maximum intra-day liquidity utilised
in CHAPS sterling.
(d) An illiquid advance to HM Government. This fluctuated prior to the
transfer of responsibility for UK central government cash
management to the UK Debt Management Office in April 2000.
The Ways and Means balance is now usually constant, varying only
very occasionally.

And, therefore, analogously with overnight standing facilities, the Bank’s monetary and financial
stability missions also meet in how the RTGS and ‘OMO’ machines fit together. The ‘OMO’
machine has already been described: it provides liquidity at overnight or longer maturities as part of
the framework for setting interest rates. The RTGS machine determines how wholesale payments
(CHAPS payments) are effected amongst the dozen or so settlement banks. All such transfers are
made in real time across the Bank’s balance sheet. Where a settlement bank’s balance is too small to
fund a payment, it borrows from us intra-day – at a zero interest rate and in amounts limited only by
how much eligible collateral it has available. In this way, the wholesale payment system is
lubricated. There is squaring off at close of business every day. That is to say, if a settlement bank
cannot repay its free intra-day borrowing, it is charged a penalty rate on its overdraft, which is the
‘bridge’ to – and forms part of, now and in the future – the monetary-policy machine. In terms of
operational mechanisms, the two machines are joined up (settlement banks, collateral etc). In terms
of pricing, the intra-day and overnight ‘markets’ are segmented. Up to now the Bank’s thinking has

34

been that, so long as there is not a market in intra-day money, we do not need to set the price in order
to ensure consistency with monetary policy; and that not rationing the supply of reserves intra-day
promotes payment system efficiency. These are issues that we keep under review,50 but our current
reform plans maintain the segmentation.
In the new framework, liquidity will, however, be provided in a way that should help to meet the
needs of the payments system as well as ensuring that monetary policy is implemented cleanly –
essentially by facilitating positive reserve balances at the Bank. As in other countries’ systems, it
will become possible for the settlement banks to use their (remunerated) cash reserves to make
CHAPS-RTGS payments during the day; ie they will be able to fund inter-settlement bank payment
transfers by drawing during the day on the pot of cash they hold with the Bank, as well as by
drawing on a pot of collateral to borrow from us intra-day. As I’ve described, the cash will be
provided to the system via OMOs; in aggregate, the banks will still need to borrow reserves from the
Bank, but the maturity will be extended from intra-day to that of the OMOs (one week). By contrast,
individual RTGS members will have the choice of acquiring their reserves, and so a means of
payment, indirectly via the unsecured money market rather than directly via OMOs or intra-day
repos with the Bank. We hope that, taken together, these measures will encourage more banks to
join RTGS. In most other industrialised countries, almost all banks are members of the RTGS
system. That eliminates intra-day payments-related credit exposures, which regrettably still exist in
the UK between the top tier settlement banks and their ‘correspondent’ bank customers and amongst
the latter. In terms of financial stability, this is a weakness in the UK’s financial architecture,
especially where the exposures are, or might in stressed conditions be, large.51
Liquidity traps and quantitative easing
I suspect that some in the audience will have been bursting with frustration at two of the assumptions
that I have maintained throughout this account: that money can be regarded as largely endogenous,
and that we need a system that caters only for setting interest rates. But what if interest rates were to

50

The use of our balance sheet for settlement of large inter-bank transfers during the day provides a bedrock of demand
for central bank money.

51

The IMF recognised this point in its Financial system stability assessment on the United Kingdom (Washington: IMF,
February 2003): “….. the two-tier structure of the payment system may still result in significant intraday exposures
between direct and indirect settling banks …… The UK authorities were encouraged to continue to give very high
priority to the identification and overall monitoring of these risks”, paragraph 76.

35

hit the zero nominal bound, ie we were in a liquidity trap? At a policy level, the recipe would of
course depend on the diagnosis of the problem; and on views about the transmission mechanism and,
in particular, the role of money within it.52 We would, for example, need to form a view – or
individual views – on whether the injection of base money was expected to work through affecting
the risk-free rate, or risk and liquidity premia on other financial assets, or both. But that lies beyond
my scope today. Rather, I want to make two points about the implementation framework. First, as I
have described, the Bank’s new framework will make provision for the acquisition of longer-term
assets (eg government securities) as part and parcel of managing our overall balance sheet in a
sensible way, while making sure that the banking system is square. Faced with a liquidity trap, the
Bank could in principle make purchases of securities to inject base money, which would be within
our vires and technically would be ‘excess reserves’. We would need to do so in a way that
preserved the integrity of our balance sheet.
The second point is that, in such circumstances, there would potentially be a need to co-ordinate with
government debt management, since that by definition also involves the exchange of securities for
cash. In a world where OMOs were conceived as an instrument to control the path of reserves, the
question of such co-ordination was familiar – as is apparent from Milton Friedman’s writings.53
Most of the time these days, it is not a practical issue.54 But it is an issue that we have identified,55
and there is nothing in our planned new framework that would inhibit such questions being explored
if they ever needed to be.
Conclusions
In designing a new framework for the Bank’s official sterling market operations, we have tried to
factor in the interactions between the implementation of monetary policy, the lubrication of the

52

For a summary of these issues see “Monetary policy and the zero bound to nominal interest rates” by Tony Yates,
Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 43, pages 27-37, Spring 2003.

53

See especially chapter 3, “Debt management and banking reform”, of A program for monetary stability, New York:
Fordham University Press, 1959.

54

55

Government debt structure and monetary conditions, edited by K. Alec Chrystal, Bank of England, 1999.

The Governor discussed some of these issues in his Ely lecture, The institutions of monetary policy, at the American
Economic Association annual meeting on 4 January 2004 (available at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches/speech208.pdf).

36

wholesale payments system, and the provision of liquidity insurance to the banking system. All are
facets of the management of central bank money and the central bank’s balance sheet. In summary,
we can implement monetary policy because we are a central bank. We are a central bank essentially
because we are the bankers’ bank. What we have to offer is central bank money. We have tried to
take a comprehensive view of how to deploy it.
One consequence is that, in various ways, the new regime will alter the operational relationship that
the Bank has with the banking system. Our aim is that lots of banks should sign up for the standing
facilities, which will require little more than fixing legal agreements etc. We hope that plenty of
banks – ie beyond the settlement banks – will choose to join the reserve averaging scheme. Progress
on both those fronts will be important to achieve our primary rate-setting objective. We also hope
that, having opened reserve accounts with the Bank, more of the large banks will choose to become
RTGS settlement banks, which would contribute to the overall safety and soundness of the financial
system.
But our pre-eminent aim is to stabilise the overnight rate at the MPC’s rate, so that the
implementation of monetary policy is cleaner and more transparent. Working with the banking
industry in the coming period of detailed planning and implementation, we are hopeful of achieving
that, and so of having an implementation framework that measures up to the UK’s overall monetary
regime.

37

ANNEX 1
THE POST-1996 REFORMS OF THE BANK OF ENGLAND’S OFFICIAL STERLING
OPERATIONS
Collateral and counterparties
In the early-mid-1990s, there were two major problems. First, the range of securities eligible in the
Bank’s operations was narrow and values outstanding had become very small; at times the Bank
held a lot of the eligible stock outstanding and the rest could, as a result, be concentrated in a few
hands. Second, OMOs were conducted with the discount houses, whose capital had not grown in
line with the size of the money market or, post ERM exit when the Bank had made substantial
purchases of sterling, the size of the banking system’s aggregate collateralised short-term borrowing
from the Bank. Specifically, to control the Bank’s exposure to credit risk, there were capital-related
limits (referred to as Tranches 1 and 2) on so-called ‘late-lending’ to the houses, and these limits
could be lifted only by a Director (on delegated authority from the Governor). Unless the
working-level operators applied for the limits to be lifted, occasionally they could constrain the
supply of reserves to an amount smaller than the system’s residual shortage after OMOs had been
conducted (so the clearing rate was infinity!). Result: a few big clearers would, and did, shift the
market rate in overnight money around at will – by holding much of the eligible collateral not
already in Bank hands and by not participating in the OMOs, so that the market could, when they
chose, remain very short. Occasionally the overnight rate went very high. The incredible ‘supplyless-than-demand’ problem was (easily) solved in 1994-95 by allowing the Principal of Discount
Office (to use the historic title) routinely to use Tranches 3-4 etc for lending to the houses. In the
major reforms of 96-98, the Bank (i) enlarged eligible collateral to include repo of gilts (and
subsequently, in 1999, a much wider range of EU government securities); (ii) moved to dealing with
banks and securities dealers in OMOs; and (iii) put bounds on rates via an adapted lending facility
(1998) and a new deposit facility (2001).
Although analytically simple and not addressing more fundamental questions about the Bank’s
operational architecture, this was a major enterprise. First, the Bank had to ‘create’ a gilt repo
market, by getting removed a whole battery of tax and regulatory impediments and by facilitating an
industry code to guard against scandals of the types that had accompanied the launch of the US repo
market a few years before. (The size of the gilt repo market is now approaching £200 billion.)1
Second, the Bank had to oversee the orderly demise of the discount houses and stock-exchange
money brokers. Third, changes to the infrastructure were needed.
The reforms killed the ability of big banks to dominate the market’s holdings of eligible collateral;
and, through the deposit and lending facilities, capped volatility (see Chart 4 in main text). But they
were not enough.

1

See Chart 30 from “Markets and Operations”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 44, pages 5-20, Spring 2004.

38

Simplifications
The 1996-98 reforms also removed layers of complexity. The OMOs were thereafter conducted at the
official policy rate, and the myth that the Bank was acquiescing in a ‘market rate’ was binned.
Operations beyond the maturity of the core ‘two-week’ repo ceased, so that for example outright
purchases of bills were confined to bills with a maturity no longer than that of the day’s repo; that
reduced, but did not eliminate, pivoting. The mechanism of ‘2.30pm lending’ at Minimum Lending
Rate was scrapped. As was a facility for the settlement banks to invite the Bank to buy Treasury Bills
up to 3pm each day, which was replaced by a simpler secured borrowing facility. We got rid of one
round of OMOs. We increased transparency by announcing the amounts allotted in rounds of OMOs,
and also the details of ‘late lending’. The ‘tranche system’ rationing access to the discount window
was abolished. And gilts of all maturities were taken as collateral rather than only gilts of up to five
years. But, notwithstanding these steps, the system remained complicated.
‘Clausing’ and the real bills doctrine
Finally, in 2000 we abolished the requirements on the ‘clausing’ of bills of exchange, which had
required that the underlying transaction be ‘self liquidating’ etc. This was a leftover from a period
when the Bank genuflected in the direction of the real bills doctrine (although that seems not to have
loomed as large in Bank thinking during the twentieth century as it did at the Federal Reserve).2 We
got rid of clausing because we did not think it provided credit enhancement, since the Bank’s claim, if
the acceptor of a bill failed, would be as a general creditor of the drawer, with no lien on the cash flows
from the underlying transaction.3

2

For the Federal Reserve’s framework, see for example A history of the Federal Reserve. vol. 1: 1913-1951 by Allan H.
Meltzer, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003.
3

We have recently learned that there had been an attempt to abolish ‘clausing’ for similar reasons in 1971 by Andrew
Crockett (then a junior official in Discount Office, later a senior IMF official, Executive Director of the Bank, and
General Manager of the BIS).

39

ANNEX 2

OBJECTIVES OF THE BANK OF ENGLAND’S OPERATIONAL FRAMEWORK
•

Objective 1: Overnight market interest rates to be in line with the MPC’s repo rate, so that
there is a flat money market yield curve, consistent with the official policy rate, out to the next
MPC decision date, with very limited day-to-day or intra-day volatility in market interest rates
at maturities out to that horizon.

•

Objective 2: An efficient, safe and flexible framework for banking system liquidity
management – both in competitive money markets and, where appropriate, using central bank
money – in routine and stressed or otherwise extraordinary conditions.

•

Objective 3: A simple, straightforward and transparent operational framework.

•

Objective 4: Competitive and fair sterling money markets.

40

ANNEX 3
SOME HISTORIAL INSIGHTS INTO THE BANK OF ENGLAND’S OFFICIAL
STERLING OPERATIONS
This annex sets out some of the source materials from the historical parts of the main paper.1
In his biography of Governor Norman, Henry Clay records that:
“In the last resort the Governor could control the supply of money in the Money Market by
varying Bank Rate - its price in last resort – and by influencing its amount by sale or purchase
of securities ….”.2
Deputy Governor Harvey was called back on Day 39 of the 1929-30 Macmillan Committee, on
which Keynes sat, for more discussion of monetary policy and its implementation.3 He made an
opening statement (Qu 7512) which includes the following:
“I said when I was here before that I regard it as the principal duty of a Central Bank to
maintain the stability of the national monetary unit…. If I were asked to state in a few words
what the Bank’s policy has been, I should say that it has been to maintain a credit position
which will afford reasonable assurance of the convertibility of the currency into gold in all
circumstances, and, within the limits imposed by that objective, to adjust the price and volume
of credit to the requirements of industry and trade. I should say at this stage that we regard the
Bank Rate as our principal weapon for carrying that policy into effect…. In speaking of the
weapons which the Bank uses I purposely omit any reference to control of the volume of credit
by means of open market operations; because, after all, such operations are merely part of the
machinery by which the weapon of the Bank Rate is made efficient.”
Nearly thirty years later, in his oral evidence to the Radcliffe Committee, Chief Cashier O’Brien
presented a similar and a rather clear picture of the system:
“If the discount houses having been to all the banks and found out what they are doing,
whether calling cash or lending cash, have finally come to the conclusion that the supply of
cash on that day is not going to be sufficient to enable them to carry their books of Treasury
bills and short bonds, they can come to us and we can repair the shortage in one of two ways.
The Chief Cashier can buy bills from the market at the market rate. There is no pain to the
discount houses; they merely exchange part of their bill portfolio at the going market price for

1

It draws on extensive research by Roger Clews, whose work almost gives the ‘archaeology of knowledge’ a good name.

2

Lord Norman by Sir Henry Clay, London: Macmillan, 1957.

3

Sir Ernest Harvey was only the second ‘full-time central banker’ to be appointed to the Bank’s Court of directors, and
was subsequently Deputy Governor for seven years. According to his obituarist, in his evidence to the MacMillan
Committee “his candour, no less than his grasp of the subject, greatly impressed those members of the Committee who
had been most critical of the Bank’s constitution and policy”.

41

cash. That puts them square. If we are not disposed to help them in that painless way then they
have to come round to the Discount Office, and nowadays borrow at Bank Rate on the security
of market Treasury Bills or short bonds.”4
“Professor Cairncross: …where you are acting as lender of last resort, you are lending at Bank
Rate? – Acting as lender of last resort, it is at Bank Rate. The other method, of buying in bills
is not lending: it is putting out cash in exchange for securities.”5
Other of O’Brien’s replies seem to imply clearly that the operating target was an interest rate, rather
than a quantity. Moreover, they do not imply that OMOs were directly setting the market rate, but
rather that OMOs were used to adjust the quantities so as to control the volume of borrowing at Bank
Rate.
“If we wanted to raise interest rates, then we would give less help or possibly no help at all,
and we would say: “If you want cash you must come to the Discount Office for it”. And
moreover we could if need be so arrange that the market needed a great deal of cash; the
influence can be graded almost infinitely.”6
Assistant Director Coleby’s 1982 paper on operational procedures for meeting monetary objectives
brings out the continuity in the Bank’s operational framework until the early-80s reforms:
“Until recently and despite variations and appearances to the contrary, the operational
technique for giving effect to official interest rate objectives has stayed close to the classical
model. That involved the setting, and periodic variation, of an official discount or lending rate,
which, when necessary, is ‘made effective’ by open market operations in the money market.
‘Making Bank rate effective’ means restraining a decline in market rates from an unchanged
Bank rate, or bringing them up to a newly established and higher Bank rate; it is accomplished
by limiting the availability of cash to the banking system so as to ‘force the market into the
Bank’ to borrow at the somewhat penal rate of Bank rate.”7
One of the “variations” to which Coleby referred was the replacement in 1972 of Bank Rate with a
Minimum Lending Rate related by formula to the result of the latest Treasury bill tender. This
change was made so that the government, negotiating on pay and price controls, might avoid the
accusation that it had raised the price of money.8 This arrangement could be and was overridden –

4

Committee on the working of the monetary system: minutes of evidence, London HM Stationery Office, 1960, question
90.

5

Ibid., question 93.

6

Ibid., question 98.

7

Published as “The Bank of England’s operational procedures for meeting monetary objectives”, Bank of England
Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 23, June 1983, page 213.
8

See Goodhart (2004), op. cit.

42

five times before it was replaced by an explicitly administered MLR in 1978. Setting a very short
lending rate by reference to a market 3-month rate had proved uncomfortable.
The reforms of the early 1980s came out of the debate on monetary base control (MBC) initiated by
the first Thatcher government elected in 1979. Although the case for MBC was eventual rejected by
the Government, the new money market arrangements were designed to leave open a move in that
direction and anyway to loosen official control over rates and give the market more influence on
rates within an “unpublished band”. Continuous posting of MLR was abandoned, as was the
preannouncement of OMO dealing rates and the practice of deliberately creating a shortage by overissuing Treasury bills on HMG’s behalf. It was also at this point that the Bank began to publish each
day its estimate of the market shortage or surplus – relative to the clearing banks’ desired operational
balances. The Bank aimed to “broadly offset the cash flows between the Bank and the money
markets” so as to leave the clearing banks within reach of their desired balances. The aim was to do
this primarily through OMOs and not through lending to the discount houses. In a 1986 BIS paper,
Tony Coleby described the scheme’s design in the following terms.9
“The normal conduct of the Bank’s money-market operations was therefore envisaged as a
market-clearing exercise. The Bank would accept as many of the offers or bids as was
necessary to square the market, starting with the best rates and arriving at the “stop rate” which
just cleared the market, the result of the operation, including the range of rates at which the
dealings had taken place, being immediately made public. Provision was made to override the
normal arrangements if they should produce a stop rate which was unacceptable to the
authorities, by lying outside an “unpublished band” which defined the range of short-term
interest rates currently judged to be consistent with policy objectives. If the stop rate was too
high, more cash would be put into the system so as to arrive at an acceptably lower one: if too
low, the system would be left short of cash so as to drive rates up.”
The system was clearly designed with variable-rate OMOs in mind. But with no continuously posted
official rates to offer a focus to the market, the “stop rates” accepted in the OMOs acquired great
significance: “…every downward movement, even as small as 1/16 per cent, came to be seen as a
signal of official intent, not as a passive or incidental response to market fluctuations”.10
In the early days of the new regime the market did sometimes initiate rate changes (in the form of
changes to banks’ base rates, which the Bank then followed in its operations). Later, there were
“growing misgivings among policy-makers over the market’s ability to provide a valid second
opinion on the conduct of policy”,11 and the official hand was not so hidden. The 1981 regime had
reserved the Bank’s right to reinstate MLR intermittently by announcing the minimum rate which,
for a short period ahead, would apply to any lending to the discount houses. And from 1985
onwards, the Bank did announce MLR from time to time, with the discount houses being invited to
borrow at MLR at 2.30pm (ie the market was ‘forced into the Bank’). But, crucially for this paper,

9

“Changes in Money-Market Instruments and Procedures in the United Kingdom” in Changes in Money-Market
Instruments and Procedures: Objectives and Implications, BIS, March 1986.
10

Ibid.

11

Ibid.

43

the mechanics of the operations on other days remained basically unchanged. In particular, the form
was still that in its OMOs, the Bank was responding to rate offers from its counterparties, with the
consequence that it was sometimes frustrated in its attempts to implement a change in rates desired
by the authorities.
There were also other residual elements of “Bank rate” as a penal rate. Dealing rates in OMOs, when
translated from discount rates to interest rates (or yields), were usually lower than the rates charged
when the market was forced into the Bank. Even when inflation targeting was introduced in the
early 1990s, with official rates explicitly decided by the Chancellor, the Bank’s OMO dealing rates
were lower than the official rate officially announced. (This was changed in the 1996-98 reforms:
see Annex 1).
One consequence of OMOs taking centre stage was that it fostered a perception that the maturity of
rates being set (or targeted) for policy purposes was the same as the maturity of the OMOs. So, for
example, the Bank said: “… if official operations could be confined to the shortest paper – maturities
of, say, not longer than one month – it would enable the market to become the dominant influence on
the shape of the yield curve for longer money-market maturities without requiring either lead or
validation from the authorities”.12 The clear implication was that conducting OMOs at a particular
maturity entailed an element of setting or validating rates at that maturity.
In the event, the Bank was not able to restrict its OMOs to short maturities. For a variety of technical
reasons,13 the scale of the banking system’s structural shortage and so of the Bank’s OMOs increased
a lot during the early 1980s. But, until the 1990s, the Bank’s daily OMOs were conducted via
purchases of commercial bills and Treausry bills, and in consequence there was not enough eligible
paper for the Bank to recycle liquidity at short maturities. The result was that the Bank occasionally
bought bills with maturities out to three months. From time to time, that fostered perceptions that the
Bank was giving signals about official policy intentions.
Through the 1990s, the Bank did not analyse the instruments of monetary policy implementation
very closely. Papers typically described the central bank as setting the pivotal interest rate in its role
as the marginal source of funds to the economy but did not explore OMOs and standing facilities
separately. The Bank’s analysis was reflected in “Monetary Policy Instruments: The UK
Experience”,14 which stated clearly that the central bank has to be the marginal source of funds while
playing down the distinction between OMOs and standing facilities: “The classical dichotomy is
between open market operations, on the one hand, and discount rate or standing facilities, on the
other. A priori ….. the differences between these are more apparent than real, especially when
window borrowing is secured on collateral…… Consistent with the increasing market orientation of
operations, there has been a gradual shift toward use of open market operations through the 1970s
and 1980s, but with the discount window available as a backstop…... Since the Bank of England

12

Coleby (1986), op. cit.

13

See the box on “Overfunding and money market operations”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Vol 22, June 1982,
page 201.

14

Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 34, pages 268-276, August 1994, a paper to which a wide range of Bank
officials contributed.

44

always stands ready to deal daily in its operations, this mid-point for short-term rates is reinforced
frequently….So there is no need for a formal band or corridor…” .
In other words, the Bank had slipped into thinking of OMOs as the instrument through which we
implemented policy.
The mid-1990s reforms achieved many useful – indeed vital – improvements, but they did not
include a review of the overall framework. That was because, as described in the main paper and
Annex 1, they addressed urgent problems with the Bank’s counterparties and with collateral. They
also made important technical changes, such as conducting OMOs only at a short maturity (two
weeks) and actually dealing at the announced official policy rate (ie the discount rates used for
outright purchases of bills were set to produce yields at the official rate). With no deposit facility in
199715 and lending facilities seen as technical ‘squaring up’ devices (if our forecast was slightly
wrong or if, because of frictions, the OMOs were not used), the OMO rate was a natural way to
express policy. and we slipped into thinking of it as how we actually implemented policy too. That
was a fallacy, as explained in the main paper.
The post-1996/97 system also abolished what had been known as ‘2.30pm lending at Minimum
Lending Rate’. It was got rid of for two reasons. One was that, apart from such lending having
typically been for a maturity of a week, it seemed simply to add yet another layer of complexity in a
system that in any case provided for ‘late lending’ to the market.16 The other was that use of MLR
was tied up with signalling (ie with ‘public demonstrations’ of the authorities’ desired level of rates),
and we had moved to a monetary regime where signalling via the Bank’s operations was not needed:
the official interest rate was decided at a monthly meeting (first by the Chancellor, subsequently the
MPC) and simply announced. Indeed, the perception that the Bank might signal had, at times, been a
complicating factor during the early 1990s. Explicitly ruling out any such possibility was one of the
lasting benefits of the 1996/97 reforms. Reflecting those considerations, ‘2.30pm lending’ had not
been used since the immediate aftermath of ERM crisis (Chart A). So we got rid of it. Although that
did not in principle impair our ability to set rates, it does nicely capture how far the Bank’s analysis
had drifted away from its historical and analytical base: 2.30pm lending was the direct descendent of
the apparatus used by previous generations to make ‘Bank Rate effective’, ie to set rates!

15

The 1996 reform proposals aired the possibility of a deposit facility to put a floor on rates. One was introduced in
2001.

16

Historically, the ‘late lending’ facility for the discount houses seems to have been thought of as ‘banking’ rather than
an instrument of policy – a muddled distinction which may go back to the 1844 Act’s separation of Issue Department and
Banking Department.

45

Chart A: Usage of ‘2.30pm lending’
day s
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1985

1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

In fact, as recorded in the main text, the operational planning in the mid-late-1990s did reflect an
understanding of the ‘classical system’:
“In addition, we may also in some conditions need to leave some of the daily shortage to be
relieved at the end of the day via late lending so as to ensure that the Bank is – and is known to
be – the marginal supplier of system liquidity throughout the day, preventing large banks from
substituting themselves as the marginal player(s). The known availability of late lending at a
known rate should also help to put a cap on the upward volatility of very short rates.”
But such discretion has not been used, in order to avoid any risk of the Bank being perceived to give
signals via its operations about the MPC’s rate intentions.

