MANAGING A BANK-SPECIFIC CRISIS: A UK PERSPECTIVE
Ian Bond, Head of Financial Crisis Management Division, Bank of England
BBA workshop on managing a bank-specific crisis
Pinners Hall 26 October 2006

Introduction
The motivation for today’s workshop really puts me – as a representative of the UK
authorities – on the spot: the authorities are, so it is said, faced with new challenges; our
roles and responsibilities are not clearly defined; and conflicts of interest may arise and
hinder effective crisis solutions.
And I have to say that I agree – up to a point. Crisis management is indeed challenging,
and has probably become rather more so in recent years. The complexity and
‘connectedness’ of the financial system, the speed with which events can unfold, the crucial
role now played by collateral (and the ability to use it efficiently) all suggest that the
problems we would face in handling a crisis would be greater than ever before.
But I’m less convinced that the challenges are (in form, at least) particularly new. After all,
it was more than thirty years ago now, in September 1974, that the G10 central bank
governors issued the so-called Basle Communique to reassure financial markets about the
adequacy of euromarket lender of last resort arrangements, in the wake of the Herstatt
collapse. So recognition of the importance of cooperation in handling crises in crossborder banks is not new. And it is reflected in the work of a number of the international
financial fora which have emerged since that collapse.
UK domestic arrangements
Before I turn to the challenges of managing a crisis in an internationally active bank,
though, I thought it might be helpful to remind you all of the current domestic
arrangements in the UK – partly because they may not yet be widely understood, and partly
because we firmly believe that robust national arrangements are an essential part of robust
international crisis management.
We take a resolutely tripartite approach to crisis management in the UK: central bank,
regulator and government (in the form of the Treasury) all have roles to play. But they are

distinct roles, and need to be clearly understood by all parties so that there is no confusion
‘on the day’ about who is responsible for what.
And these roles need to be carried out co-operatively. The framework for this cooperation
is provided by the tripartite Memorandum of Understanding, first drawn up in 1997 when
responsibility for banking supervision moved from the Bank to the newly-established FSA.
A revised MoU was published in March this year, at the time of the Budget.
As “the bankers’ bank”, maintenance of the stability of the financial system as a whole is
naturally one of the Bank’s two core purposes. We contribute to this by
•

Ensuring the stability of the monetary system, acting in the markets to deal with
fluctuations in liquidity

•

Overseeing ‘systemically significant’ financial system infrastructure – in particular,
core payment systems

•

Maintaining a broad overview of the system as a whole

•

In exceptional circumstances, undertaking official support operations in order to
limit the risk of problems in or affecting particular institutions spreading to other
parts of the financial system

The FSA is responsible for the authorisation and prudential supervision of financial firms;
the supervision of financial markets and clearing/settlement systems; carrying out various
actions in response to problem cases; and for regulatory policy in these areas. FSA incrisis actions might include, for example, changing capital or other regulatory
requirements; or the facilitation of a market solution – which might involve the
introduction of new third party capital into a troubled firm.
For its part, the Treasury is responsible for the overall institutional structure of financial
regulation, and for informing and accounting to Parliament for the management of serious
problems in the financial system.
The principal forum for coordinating and agreeing action between the three authorities is
the Tripartite Standing Committee: the Standing Committee on Financial Stability, to give
it its full title. This is chaired by the Treasury and comprises senior representatives of the
three authorities. It meets monthly at deputies level, and meetings can be called at other
times by any of the participating authorities if they feel that there is an issue which needs to
be addressed urgently.

2

In exceptional circumstances, for instance where a support operation is being considered,
Standing Committee would meet at principals level: the Chancellor, the Governor and the
Chairman (or senior alternates).
What would actually happen, were a bank-specific crisis to develop? The tripartite
authorities have established a more detailed working level co-ordination procedure which
would underpin these Standing Committee arrangements. These processes are designed to
ensure that the authorities’ response is orderly, that they gather and share relevant
information quickly and that they act in a coordinated way. They have been developed in
the light of experience from two simulation exercises, one in June 2004 and another in
October 2005; and they will be regularly reviewed in the light of experience and periodic
testing.
The over-arching guiding principle for the UK response to a financial crisis is that support
operations or other exceptional interventions should only be undertaken “in the case of a
genuine threat to the stability of the financial system to avoid a serious disturbance in the
UK economy.”.
That’s a hard test, but a sensible one: the authorities cannot and should not be expected to
intervene with a support package every time a bank – even a large one – gets into
difficulties. The cost of such an interventionist approach, in terms of market discipline and
fiscal burden, would be substantial. And it would in all likelihood compromise the
efficient provision of financial services and inhibit the exit of weak firms from the industry.
Ultimate responsibility for authorising support operations rests with the Chancellor. He
would do so with advice (for which we would be accountable) from both the Bank and the
FSA: the MoU requires each authority to assess the seriousness of the crisis and its
potential implications, and to provide separate assessments to the Treasury together with
their views on the options available to the Chancellor.
That may sound distinctly un-cooperative, but the process for preparing these assessments
would be less like a competitive examination than this appears. For example,
•

we would share information freely, so that the assessments would be based on a
common information set

•

we have worked together to develop a common framework for assessing the severity of
a crisis, to ensure that we are covering similar ground and using a common language to
talk about the impact

3

•

we are adopting a common template for assembling the analysis and presenting the
assessment to the Treasury.

If so much is similar, what is separate about the assessments? First, as the MoU notes, the
Bank and FSA have distinct responsibilities and expertise. So we might attach weight to
different factors, or attach different weight to the same factors, in offering our separate
advice. FSA, for example, has a consumer protection objective; the Bank does not. And
second, more importantly, systemic assessment is not and never can be a purely
mechanical exercise: it depends crucially on judgments. Information will inevitably be
incomplete and potentially also unreliable; and future actions or events will be uncertain.
So reasonable, well-informed people could arrive at different conclusions even on the
same evidence.
To me, one of the strengths of this process is that it forces these uncertainties and
ambiguities into the open, and creates an environment in which they will be considered
from different perspectives before the big decisions are taken. So they should be better
decisions. And it is likely to be clearer, after the event, why they were taken and whether
the advice was reasonable, given what was known at the time.
This is perhaps a good point for me to mention a couple of recent practical developments
which support these UK arrangements.
The first is the factbooks project, which many of you will be aware of. I’ve already
emphasised the importance of information sharing between the tripartite authorities (and
particularly between Bank and FSA) to support crisis management decisions and actions.
We know from experience, though, that getting hold of the right information quickly can
be quite a challenge. So the idea of assembling key information in advance, and being
open about what additional information might need to be called for ‘on the day’, has
obvious attractions. That is what factbooks are all about: they are a tool for mobilising
and sharing information quickly between the Tripartite authorities. Despite a fair amount
of international discussion – and even some trialling under the auspices of the FSF – the
idea has been slow to become a reality, in part because there always seem to be more
pressing jobs to do. But we’re now embarked on a project (led by FSA) to do just that, in
the UK, and hope to have basic factbooks for the larger firms in place by next spring.
The second development I want to mention is the Bank’s new money market arrangements
and, specifically, the standing facilities associated with them. These facilities offer
participants the unlimited capacity to borrow from the Bank against eligible collateral,
usually at a penalty rate of interest, and so make the provision of emergency liquidity
4

much more straightforward. Following major operational or financial disruption, we can
reduce the penalty – if necessary, to the point at which we are lending at Bank Rate.
Banks accounting for some 95% of the banking system’s sterling liabilities have signed up
for access to these facilities, materially enhancing our capacity to provide rapid liquidity
assistance when it is needed. That should reduce the risk of a short-term liquidity problem
developing into a full-blown crisis.
For completeness, I should also mention that there are separate – but broadly similar –
arrangements for handling operational emergencies in which the Government’s
Emergency Response machinery comes into action. These give a rather greater role to the
Treasury than does the TCP, reflecting their participation in key Governmental crisis
management groups. As with the TCP, though, it is Standing Committee which is
responsible for strategic decision taking.
Mapping UK arrangements to international crises
So how do these domestic arrangements work, if the bank in difficulties has overseas
operations (or, indeed, is based abroad but operates also in the UK)?
Our approach here is to operate on a basis of ‘like with like’ cross-border interactions and
to rely on our domestic processes to join things up. That builds on the normal day to day
relationships, and – as with our domestic arrangements – should avoid duplication and
delay. So ELA coordination, for example, would generally be a matter for central bank to
central bank contacts; regulatory issues would be handled by the FSA; and for fiscal and
other inter-governmental aspects the relevant finance ministries would normally take the
lead (based of course on the agreed tripartite strategy in each case).
One of the first thing one notices on looking at other countries is that they each have their
own domestic financial structures – and mapping between the UK tripartite authorities and
our overseas counterparts is not always straightforward. There will generally be natural
counterparts to the Treasury and Bank of England, but the organisation of supervision is
much less uniform. While a unified national financial regulator, separate from the central
bank, is becoming a more common structure, many variants exist and dispersed
responsibilities for supervision, often with some degree of direct central bank involvement,
remain common. But cross-border supervisory channels of communication – particularly
within the EU – are well-established now, so in practice this is unlikely to be a major
problem. A bigger challenge, perhaps, is simply the number of authorities which might
have a material interest in problems affecting a major international bank.

5

And alongside these different structures, there are many differences in roles, powers and
responsibilities; and more or less well articulated processes and approaches to crisis
management.
How does one bring this disparate set of players and contexts together to deliver effective
cross-jurisdiction crisis management? One important feature of this complicated
landscape, which helps to tie it together into a coherent whole, is the growing network of
Memoranda of Understanding which set out the various authorities’ commitments to share
information and to work together to handle crises.
It’s perhaps not surprising that the EU has led the way here, building on the precedent of
the supervisory arrangements which support the single market in banking services. The
most recent EU MoU embraces supervisors, central banks and finance ministries and is a
significant advance on previous understandings. But the EU is not alone: there are other
important regional agreements, often reflecting particular features of their financial
systems which make such agreements self-evidently necessary: the Nordics, for example;
and Australia and New Zealand.
Further progress in this area is plainly desirable, and it’s certainly not being neglected.
Indeed, the UK authorities and the FSF are jointly hosting an international workshop in
London in mid-November to take stock of current arrangements and to consider ways of
taking this strand of work forward.
One practical way of building on the MoUs and other cooperation agreements is to make
information sharing part of a continuing dialogue, not just part of the crisis management
machinery. So I see considerable attractions in the notion of so-called ‘interest groups’:
groups comprising authorities linked by a shared interest in an internationally active firm,
which is systemically important within their jurisdiction. The idea is a close cousin to that
of colleges of supervisors, though the constituency for interest groups is probably both
broader (in that it would need to include central banks) and narrower (in that practicality
probably dictates some threshold below which a host country would not normally be
invited to participate directly).
Regular dialogue within such a group – perhaps also, on occasion, directly with the firm
concerned – could do much to increase the relevant authorities’ awareness and
understanding of the issues they might face in handling a crisis in that firm. It could also
constitute the core of a forum within which possible courses of action could be discussed,
if a crisis were to arise.

6

Some fundamental issues
But these steps should not disguise the fact that the effective handling of financial crises
faces (and has long faced) some challenging obstacles beyond the basic sharing of
information.
There is much talk these days, for example, of burden sharing: do we know how the costs
of supporting an internationally-active bank would be apportioned? That’s certainly an
issue, but for me is some way down the track. There are formidable and more immediate
issues about how – and by whom – decisions should be taken; what the criteria for action
by the authorities should be; which authorities should be expected to act, and in which
capacities, to avert or minimise the impact of a crisis; even, what measures are
realistically available to the authorities in handling a major crisis.
Underlying these issues is, I think, a more fundamental conundrum. The business and
structural realities of modern international banking, and the supervisory approach which
accompanies them, pay little regard to national boundaries. Large banks now manage their
liquidity and capital on a regional or even global basis, and their risk management and IT
systems have developed accordingly. That’s sensible, if the goal is to achieve efficient,
broadly diversified banks which can deliver financial services as cheaply as possible
Yet legal and fiscal realities – both of which inevitably intrude on crisis management –
remain resolutely national in their scope and instincts. A single bank may in fact comprise
a large family of entities in different countries, both branches and subsidiaries, and so be
subject to no single overriding jurisdiction. How could it be closed in an orderly way?
How, indeed, could it be kept going, in these litigious times, where a single creditor in any
one of these jurisdictions could unravel a carefully-assembled rescue or restructuring plan?
The bottom line is that we may be paying a hidden price for efficient banking: crises – if
and when they occur – may as a result be more difficult to deal with.
I would not for a moment seek to argue that the tide of international banking should be
rolled back, and that we should somehow re-instate a parochial, national approach to
supervisory matters. That would be unthinkable. But what can we do, to strengthen the
authorities’ capability to deal with troubled banks?
Our crisis management capability can of course be improved, and that is being actively
pursued. But I think that it is likely to be a slow process – particularly if the legal and
fiscal issues are to be tackled effectively.
7

The other important strand is that of crisis avoidance: making as sure as we can that the
chances of incurring these extra costs are as low as possible. A stable macroeconomic
environment, supported by effective monetary and fiscal policies, is an important part of
that. So too is early identification of potential problems, and prompt response to them.
Regular risk assessment work – such as the Bank publishes periodically in the Financial
Stability Report – is part of that. It helps us to spot vulnerabilities early, and to mitigate
them before they have become the germ of a crisis. So too is stress testing, both by banks
and by the authorities. And of course the steady improvements which have been made to
supervisory processes and techniques over the years, and the development of more robust
financial system infrastructure, also help to increase the shock-resilience of the financial
system.
So it’s a varied strategy, combining both vigilance and prompt action to minimise the risks
that crises will occur with longer-term work to overcome some of the long-standing
obstacles to effective crisis management. Both are necessary. And if we neglect either of
them, perhaps the price we will eventually pay – in a more costly crisis – will outweigh the
benefits we currently enjoy from having allowed commercial and investment banking to
evolve into the efficient cross-border business it is today.

October 2006

8

