Bank of England
Mark Carney, Governor
Speech at TUC Congress, Liverpool
9th September 2014

Page 2
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech at TUC Congress, Liverpool

Mark Carney, Governor:

Thank you, thank you very much Taj, I'd like to thank the
Congress for that welcome and for this opportunity. It is
truly a great pleasure for me to address this Congress; it's a
pleasure to be back in Liverpool and it's an important time,
it's an important time to discuss conditions in the UK labour
market. And that's what I'm going to focus on exclusively in
my prepared remarks.
I'm going to do that because, as you well know, the growth
and distribution of jobs and incomes matter to everyone.
Employment does much more than provide the means to
support families; it is essential to personal fulfilment and to
human dignity. And part of that dignity is being paid a living
wage.
Over the past year …

Applause
Over the past year at the Bank of England, we have ensured
that we pay all of our staff at least a living wage. And we
have recently brought up all our contracted service staff in
central London to the London living wage.
Applause
And because it's important to get this absolutely right, we're
going through our final review. But I want to make it
absolutely clear, that by the time of the next TUC Congress,
our intention is to become an accredited Living Wage
employer; so you don't just have to take my word for it.
Applause
Now of course, the Bank of England’s responsibilities for
promoting the good of the people of the United Kingdom go

Page 3
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech at TUC Congress, Liverpool

much, much further than being a responsible employer. We
manage monetary policy to achieve price stability; in other
words, low, stable and predictable inflation. And we promote
financial stability by regulating and supervising banks, as well
as taking action to ensure against unsustainable
indebtedness, such as we did earlier this year for the housing
market.
By maintaining price and financial stability we put in place the
foundations for sustainable job creation and income growth.
And it's that stability that gives workers the confidence to
invest in skills or to change jobs. And it gives businesses the
confidence to hire new workers, to invest in new equipment,
to introduce new products, or to pursue new markets. We
obviously need the right workers with the right skills, and we
need our companies taking the strategic initiatives to grow
productivity, because it's productivity that will secure the real
wage increases that British workers deserve over the medium
term.
Now as I've started to explain and I think it's clear, the labour
market is central to the Bank's decisions - decisions which
have to take into account both short-term fluctuations in
employment and profound changes that are sweeping labour
markets across the advanced economies.
These changes include powerful demographic forces, notably
the ageing of the workforce, increases in longevity, and
increased female participation. They include, as you were
just discussing I think, how globalisation and new
technologies are splitting production chains not just across
companies but across borders; how financial risk is steadily
shifting to employees from employers and from the state;
and finally how job polarisation is increasing, that is the
phenomenon that the employment share of middle-skilled

Page 4
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech at TUC Congress, Liverpool

jobs is being reduced relative to higher and lower skilled
employment.
So collectively all of these forces have been acting for some
time. They all affect the dynamism of our labour market and
they affect the spending patterns of families. And so as a
central bank, the Bank of England has to assess the extent to
which these structural changes have an impact on the
economy, on labour markets, on the economy, on inflation
and we're grappling with what it means for monetary policy.
And that's not unique to us that's the same across the
advanced world, it's the same in the US, it's the same in
Europe.
And the answers to these questions, the weight of these
forces are different in different economies and that's one
reason why monetary policy in the United States, in the euro
area and here in the UK can be expected to be less
synchronised in the future than they have been in recent
years.
Indeed, despite common underlying influences, differences in
how the labour markets of major economies have performed
in response to the Great Recession have been striking. Let's
take the world’s largest economy, still the United States, let's
take that as a benchmark. Unemployment there more than
doubled during the recession. And that rate, that
unemployment rate has recently fallen back, but the headline
is much better than the details.
The number of Americans in work has only just returned to
where it was before Lehman Brothers failed six years ago,
even though there are now 14 million more Americans of
working age. And much of the fall in the unemployment rate
in the United States is the result of workers in their prime

Page 5
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech at TUC Congress, Liverpool

actually leaving the labour force, in other words giving up and
stopping looking for work.
In addition, far more vacancies are unfilled than usual,
indicating that there are big mismatches between skills in the
labour market - skills and jobs in the labour market. And
fewer people are switching jobs, suggesting a reluctance to
take risks. In short, the American labour market still isn't
working as it used to.
Turning to the UK, even though times for many families here
have been very tough, in comparison to the United States,
the UK labour market has performed well. Despite a
recession that was deeper and more prolonged than the
United States, unemployment didn't rise as much in the UK
and it has fallen back almost as sharply as it did in the US.
As important, or in fact more importantly, in contrast to the
United States, this rapid fall in unemployment here has been
accompanied by significantly higher participation rates. There
are now one million more people in work in the UK than at
the start of the crisis.
But as this Congress knows, as the theme of this Congress
illustrates, that exceptional employment performance has
come at a cost. Wage growth has been very weak; in fact
adjusted for inflation wages have fallen by a tenth since the
onset of the crisis. And in order to find such a fall in the past,
you would have to go back to the early 1920s.
What's happened in effect has been the weakness of pay has
purchased that increased job creation. The burden - said
another way - the burden of the Great Recession has been
shared across this country. Profits have been squeezed
almost as much as labour costs; employees have seen their

Page 6
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech at TUC Congress, Liverpool

real incomes reduced, but more people are at work as a
result.
What has made the performance even more remarkable is
that we have faced the additional challenge - unlike the
Americans, we've faced the additional challenge of rebuilding
competitiveness.
If you look over the Channel to the euro area they had a
similar challenge, but they had to face that challenge with
less flexible labour markets, and less flexibility in their
currency. And the results have been dire.
Euro area unemployment has risen sharply through two
recessions; it now stands at over 11%. It is over 14% in
Portugal, 20% in Spain, and 25% in Greece. And there is a
clear danger of a misplaced, if not lost, generation of workers
in the US as well as the euro area.
Britain’s labour force and Britain's trade unions deserve great
credit for ensuring that this risk, this risk of a lost generation
is much lower here in the UK. By sharing the burden of the
recession, our economy is better positioned for the future.
But the question, the question you're asking is whether we
will seize this opportunity.
Now before I talk a bit about how we could seize that
opportunity I think it is helpful to understand a bit more why
the UK labour market outperformed, or at least outperformed
in terms of employment.
What happened was - when the recession hit naturally the
demand for work fell, but surprisingly the potential supply of
labour appears to have increased at the same time. The
number of additional people wanting to work actually
overwhelmed the longer-term effects of population ageing.

Page 7
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech at TUC Congress, Liverpool

So why was that the case? Well it appears that greater risks
and financial burdens that many families are now facing have
been driving this phenomenon. Changes to pension
arrangements have encouraged people to work longer.
Reforms to the UK's welfare system, including attaching job
search conditions to welfare payments, are prompting those
affected to seek work.
But on top of all of that sharp falls in wealth and increased
uncertainty about future incomes following the financial crisis
have undoubtedly forced many people to retire later in order
to compensate. And the scale of the debts weighing on
British households has undoubtedly encouraged more people
to work, and to work for longer. So the strong performance
of the UK labour market reflects in part people feeling
compelled to work for financial and other reasons.
Now again, to their great credit, your great credit, when
British workers have been challenged, they haven't given up.
Some have taken on less productive or lower-skilled jobs.
Others are working part-time. Some have become selfemployed. Others are prepared to do the same work for less
than they would have done.
If you bring that together to wage pressures, wage pressures
based on past relationships are as low today as if the
unemployment rate were 10%, not the 6.4% rate it currently
is.
Basically with more people - more workers at competitive
wages, companies have been encouraged to hire, and they
have substituted labour for capital across the economy. This
dynamic - substitution of labour for capital - has lowered
productivity. But that's not the result - that weak
productivity growth isn't the result of laziness on anyone's
part. It's the natural consequence of so many people wanting

Page 8
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech at TUC Congress, Liverpool

to work and companies employing them instead of investing
in capital.
One of my points is that, although this adjustment has been
painful, trading off lower productivity and lower wages for
much higher - and it is much, much higher - employment, on
balance that trade - that trade-off provides a solid foundation
for a durable expansion. By staying in work individuals retain
and learn new skills, and they are better placed to participate
in the expansion as it gathers force.
So the consequence of all this is that Britain has an
opportunity, seldom seen after a deep and prolonged
recession, to reach and sustain a higher level of employment
than in the past. And workers have an opportunity now to
maximise their pay prospects.
But you are rightly asking - when will this start? When will
Britain get a pay rise?

Well as employment approaches its

new higher level, wage pressures should increase and capital
investment should continue to recover; productivity growth
should pick up, bringing the higher sustainable pay rises that
British workers deserve.
Specifically, the Bank’s latest forecast expects real wage
growth to resume around the middle of next year and then to
accelerate as the unemployment rate continues to fall to
around 5.5% over the next three years.
By the end of our forecast, we see 4% nominal pay growth on
average across the economy. And this is consistent both with
our inflation target, which is our core mandate - consistent
both with our inflation target and with the economy’s
potential. Now I'll touch on at the end of my remarks how
workers and employers can raise that potential and as a
consequence raise the size of that pay rise.

Page 9
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech at TUC Congress, Liverpool

But let me first turn to the implications of all these
developments for monetary policy. As I said at the outset,
one of our roles at the Bank of England is to deliver price
stability and do so in a way that supports jobs and growth.
Our price stability objective is clear - an inflation target of 2%
Consumer Price inflation.
Supporting jobs means helping the economy reach the
maximum sustainable level of employment. And what we
have to recognise, and the reason I went through all those
dynamics and forces in the labour market, what we have
recognise is that sustainable level of employment changes
over time.
A little more than a year ago, even though inflation had been
above target for almost five years, even though growth was
returning and was poised to accelerate, the Bank of England
didn't raise interest rates from their historic low of half a
percent.
We didn't raise interest rates because we recognised that the
UK had a huge number of unemployed and under-employed
workers. We didn't raise interest rates because we knew the
economy was running below full capacity. We didn't raise
interest rates because we expected inflation to fall back. We
didn't raise interest rates because we saw that confidence
might have been returning, but knew it remained fragile.
And in short we didn't raise interest rates because we knew
the nascent recovery that began about 15 months ago, that
recovery was not yet secure.
So what we did do was to use the flexibility in our remit, the
flexibility in our mandate to return inflation to target over a
longer period than usual in order to support sustainable jobs
and growth.

Page 10
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech at TUC Congress, Liverpool

And in order to make our intentions clear, the Bank
committed not even to think about raising interest rates until
unemployment fell back to at least 7%. That so-called
forward guidance gave businesses the confidence to hire and
invest and it reassured households that the costs of servicing
their debts were not about to rise suddenly just because the
economy was returning to growth.
The effectiveness of that policy was reinforced by actions
taken to help heal the banks and the rest of the financial
sector. And the resultant recovery has exceeded all
expectations. This recovery has momentum. Over 800,000
jobs have been created in the past year alone. And we
expect robust economic growth of 3.5% this year and 3%
next.
But that's not enough. The challenge now is not to nurture a
nascent recovery; we've done that. The challenge now is to
secure a durable expansion and to make sure this economy
realises its full potential.
Now an obvious question is - what does that mean for
interest rates?

We're in a position where many of the

conditions - many, but not all - many of the conditions for the
economy to normalise have now been met, and with that the
point at which interest rates also begin to normalise is getting
closer.
In recent months the judgement about precisely when to
raise Bank Rate from its historic low has become more
balanced.

But the Bank doesn't have a pre-set course; the

timing of these moves will depend on the data, will depend on
how the economy evolves.

Page 11
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech at TUC Congress, Liverpool

Moreover, the precise timing of the first rate rise is much less
important than our expectation that, when rates do begin to
rise, those increases are likely to be gradual and limited.
Interest rates will only go up as far and as fast as is
consistent with price stability, as part of a durable expansion,
with the maximum sustainable level of employment.
For a variety of reasons ranging from the weakness in the
euro area, to that ongoing repair of household balance sheets
that I spoke about a moment ago, we are not expecting
interest rates to head back to the levels seen before the
Great Recession.
Now the actual path of interest rates will be determined by
the balance of aggregate supply and demand in the economy.
Before the crisis - before the crisis hit these decisions were
somewhat easier, monetary policy largely tracked
developments in aggregate demand because the structural
dynamics of labour supply and the rate of productivity growth
in the economy, both of those were relatively constant. But
in the wake of the crisis, the supply side of the economy has
been anything but predictable.
Now if I'd been here a year and a half ago, I would have said
that we thought at that point the major uncertainties on the
supply side centred around productivity growth. But as we've
observed wages, employment and productivity evolve in
recent quarters, we're increasingly of the view that there has
been a material labour supply shock for the reasons that I
have just discussed.
So our forecast for the next three years - our economic
forecast for the next three years, and hence our judgements
about interest rate decisions, are based on some key
judgements about the labour market, particularly that the
number of people participating in the labour force will

Page 12
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech at TUC Congress, Liverpool

continue to rise. Secondly that the unemployment rate that
the economy can sustain without generating accelerating
inflation will return to where it was before the Great
Recession in contrast with some other major economies. And
thirdly that there's scope for average hours worked, or for the
average hours that people work to continue to increase.
In short, unlike the US and unlike the euro area, the British
economy is likely able to sustain a higher level of
employment than in the past. And our uncertainty is less
about the direction of this change than about the magnitude.
And in order to assess the magnitude of this change, this
higher level of employment, and to assess its implications for
inflation, we are tracking a range of indicators, including
those of the prospective paths for wages and unit labour
costs.
Now, actual wage growth, as you've been discussing, is
currently very weak; it's just 0.6%, excluding bonuses.
There are beginning, however, to be some leading indicators
that point to a modest pick up in coming quarters. For
example, job to job flows have been increasing and some
surveys of pay growth have picked up more sharply in the
last year. This offers some encouragement of better wage
prospects for those changing or finding new jobs.
But of course, the pay of existing employees needs to pick up
as well. After all, what matters for economy-wide inflation is
the average wage relative to economy-wide productivity. And
to that end, the Bank will be monitoring closely pay
settlements that are bunched towards the turn of the year
and will be taking a steer from the pay of new hires, more as
a potential leading indicator of broader pay pressures.

Page 13
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech at TUC Congress, Liverpool

Now some observers have discounted the implications for
inflation of the recent weakness of pay growth, because some
of it stems from the types of jobs that are being filled. But
these are real jobs being performed by real people, and an
increase in lower skilled, lower wage jobs is one consequence
of working-off the labour supply shock.

And we also need to

be mindful of those longer-term trends I spoke of at the start.
We also need to be mindful in other words, that this could
represent part of a trend towards greater job polarisation.
The point is - what matters for inflationary pressures,
irrespective of the type of job, is the relationship between
wages and productivity. And that relationship is captured by
unit labour costs. And when we look across the economy at
the moment, wage growth is barely above productivity
growth. And soft unit labour costs indicate there is further to
go before we reach the new sustainable level of employment.
In other words, there is still slack in the labour market. That
slack is wasteful and if it were to remain, inflation would
remain below the 2% target.
Now our best current collective judgement is that, while it has
narrowed rapidly - while the degree of slack has narrowed
rapidly, slack remains broadly in the region of 1% of GDP. As
I said a moment ago, as this margin of slack continues to
narrow, we expect wages to pick up slightly faster than
productivity. However, we expect that it will take a better
part of three years for this to happen materially enough to
bring inflation back to target.
With inflation at 1.6%, continuing downward pressure from
past depreciation of sterling, and with that margin of slack
remaining, the current inflation environment is benign. But it
won't remain benign if we don't increase rates prudently as
the expansion progresses.

Page 14
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech at TUC Congress, Liverpool

The Bank's latest forecasts show that, if interest rates were to
follow broadly the path expected by markets or at least the
path expected by markets in August, that is beginning to
increase by the spring and thereafter rising very gradually,
inflation would settle at around 2% by the end of our forecast
and a further 1.2 million jobs would have been created. In
other words, we would achieve our mandate.
Now that's a forecast, and there is always uncertainty about
the future. But uncertainty does not mean stasis. You can
expect interest rates to begin to increase. The exact path of
interest rates will depend on the economy and the Bank's
assessment will undoubtedly change as the economy evolves
and of course policy will be adjusted if geopolitical events
have a material impact on the outlook.
If indicators suggest that the economy is moving more slowly
towards our goals, we will have learned that we are further
from sustainable capacity. Prospective wages and unit labour
cost growth will be weaker and rates will go up later and
more gradually.
But if we see faster progress, prospective wages and unit
labour cost growth will be stronger, which will suggest we are
closer to maximum capacity in the economy and that the
economy can sustain higher rates sooner. But in all of those
scenarios rate rises can be expected to be gradual and limited
compared to the experience of the UK in the past.
So let me conclude, and we'll get to questions. Look, we are
under no illusions, the Great Recession was a calamity and
British workers have borne many of the consequences.

Page 15
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech at TUC Congress, Liverpool

Our job at the Bank of England is to maintain price and
financial stability, because price and financial stability support
sustainable growth in jobs and incomes.
But monetary policy cannot do it alone. Others, including
trade unions, governments and businesses - you will
determine the potential of this economy. You will ultimately
determine the size of Britain’s pay rise.
Those in work need to be able to seize new job opportunities
in a world where technology and globalisation cause labour
markets to shift rapidly. As you've been discussing over the
last day and a half and much, much longer, skill levels need
to be raised continually. That is first and foremost clearly
about education. But crucially it also means access to lifelong
learning, both on and off the job and access that's available
to all.
And the TUC’s engagement with the UK’s skills agenda is a
major contribution to achieving that imperative. As just one
example in the past year alone, unionlearn helped more than
200,000 people to invest in their skills.
And these are the types of investments are absolutely crucial
for the durability of this expansion and for Britain’s future.
These are the type of investments that will help deliver longterm productivity, so that the British people get the pay rise
they deserve.
Thank you very much for your attention, I'll take your
questions.
Applause
Mohammad Taj:

Mark I would like to thank you for your address and before I
ask Frances to join you to facilitate a question and answer

Page 16
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech at TUC Congress, Liverpool

session, let me just say that every year, every president has
a theme to choose and mine this year was 'End Low Pay' I
just want to thank you for ending low pay for your
employees; well done.
Applause
Mohammad Taj:

I'm now inviting Frances to join and facilitate a question and
answer session.

Frances O'Grady:

Thank you very much, President, and I hope President with
your agreement we might go on a little bit longer just so that
we can get a few questions in.

Mohammad Taj:

Agreed. Thank you.

Frances O'Grady:

But the brisker and shorter those questions are, and if I
group them, then hopefully the Governor can answer them
concisely too. So could we kick off first please with two
questions on the public sector from UNISON and SoR.

Ash Walthamson, UNISON:

A report for UNISON by Landman Economics found the cost to
the government of increasing public sector pay is significantly
less than might be expected. This is partly due to the extra
demand generated as pay increases. Every 1% increase in
public sector pay injects between £470m and £880m of extra
value into the economy. Given the Governor's previous
concerns around the need to see wages improving before
interest rates are raised, would he therefore agree that much
more need to be done to boost the take home pay of public
sector workers?

Applause
Steve Herring,

Page 17
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech at TUC Congress, Liverpool

Vice President, SCoR:

Our question is - our members in the NHS are facing yet
another pay freeze, the fourth in five years, while average
earnings growth across the economy continues to lag behind
price increases. What are the consequences for long-term
economic stability if working people are denied the benefits of
an improving economy?

Applause
Mark Carney, Governor:

A very important question. Let me say at the outset,
absolutely recognise that I quoted the figure which is an
aggregate economy-wide figure. Everyone is aware of this
but a 10% fall in real incomes since the crisis, but that’s
across the economy. The hit in the public sector has been
larger and we’re well aware of that.
And that creates real difficulty. It’s one of the reasons why
we are very conscious about the pace and degree of potential
interest rate increases, the timing, pace and degree of
potential interest rate increases. We need to see the
prospects of wage growth coming in, real wage growth across
the economy including through the public sector.
Now let me just stress two other points. First is that
ultimately wage growth in the public sector and wage growth
across the economy is going to be determined by
productivity, so what we’re doing is trying to put in place the
conditions to maximise that and ensure that it flows through.
And I’ll emphasise that, from a financial stability perspective,
because you raised the second question on financial stability,
this is something we are taking very seriously. It’s one of the
reasons why we acted on housing earlier this year, because
we had concern about in an environment of low pay growth,
amongst other factors, that the debt burden that could be
built up through the housing market would weigh on this
economy, not just next year and the year after that, but

Page 18
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech at TUC Congress, Liverpool

much further out and very materially reduce incomes and
livelihoods, not just for public sector workers but workers
across the UK.
Frances O’Grady:

Thank you very much. I've got a group of three questions,
two on interest rates from Unite and GMB, and then one from
Equity on investment.

Dawn McAllister,
Unite Scottish Executive Member: Good afternoon. Millions of people are over indebted and my
union Unite has highlighted how many people have to borrow
from payday lenders to get through the month because of low
wages and cuts in real wages. An interest rate rise is likely to
have a wide social and economic fallout as people can no
longer make ends meet, and many will face the prospect of
losing their homes. How much is the Bank of England going
to consider this and whether wages have increased, when
looking at whether to raise interest rates?
Applause
Kath Farr, GMB Scotland:

You said that when unemployment rate fell below 7%,
interest rates would rise as part of an economic strategy on
inflation. You did not follow that through. Is this because of
the impact a rise in interest rates would have on millions of
working people, or was it something to do with the pressures
politically not to support interest rates this side of an
election?

Applause
Linda Rooke, Equity:

Is there a place for regulation to ensure economic stimulus is
delivered to the wider UK economy as opposed to only the
financial sector? For example, to the powerhouse that is the
creative industries, which delivered 15.6% of GDA in 2012.
Thank you.

Page 19
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech at TUC Congress, Liverpool

Applause
Mark Carney, Governor:

If I try to group them, there are three aspects here. The first
- and I welcome the focus because it’s absolutely essential this focus on indebtedness of British households, the
sensitivity to interest rates and what that means for
monetary policy. Because ultimately what it means for
growth, the pressures on inflation, what it means for
monetary policy.
We are very sensitive to this. We conduct extensive analysis
of not just economy-wide indebtedness, but cohorts or groups
of people within the economy and how indebted they are. We
see that through surveys and other analysis. It’s 40% of
British households feel acutely the weight of their
indebtedness, and we look at how they would adjust to
potential rate increases. It’s one of the factors that
influences without question the path of monetary policy and
durability of the recovery, or the expansion rather.
So what’s important is that there is a prospect of wage
increases. There's a real prospect of wage increases and
those wage increases are coming through, because that helps
to reduce the burden of that indebtedness. And what I was
concentrating on in the speech is the dynamic is - as this
extra workforce finds employment, in economist speak as the
slack is used up - a terrible way to talk about it, but as it’s
used up in the labour market, then we start to see those
prospects. But we are very alert to this issue and it
influences all our policies. That’s the first point.
The second point, because both there was the reference to
payday lenders, but then there was the reference to bank
lending, and particularly I think to the creative industries
which is an important point, there is a radical restructuring

Page 20
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech at TUC Congress, Liverpool

going on which isn’t finished, but it is in train, of the banking
sector in this country.
We have fundamentally changed the cost of banking to the
banks of various activities. It is much, much more expensive
for banks to engage in trading in the City, investing in
financial markets, as opposed to lending to the real economy.
Now these are big, somewhat lumbering institutions and it
takes them a while to adjust, but they need to be successful,
they need to build the skills to lend to businesses.
And as you know, inequality you know that much of the
future of this country is in the creative industries, is in
industries where the basic assets are human capital and ideas
and imagination, and so those banks need to be able to make
the credit decisions around lending into those industries. It
will take them a while, but the incentives are there and
they’re much more resilient in order to be able to do that visà-vis payday lenders and others.
What’s important is that there are new banks that can come
in and compete against these very high rates of interest and
very ineffective rates of interest for households. And so we
have streamlined the ability of new banks to come in, and
we’ve had a fourfold increase in the amount of applications
and the number of new challenger banks that are coming
through. Again, we have to do more but that’s a focus for us.
And then this last point just on interest rates and politics is
the way I would term it. The first thing to say is we’re
absolutely indifferent to the political cycle, to who’s in
government, who might be in government, who was in
government. We’re given a specific mandate, it’s basically
unchanged since 1997, to achieve that 2% inflation target.
And we manage monetary policy in order to achieve that, and
if we need to raise interest rates before, or lower them for

Page 21
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech at TUC Congress, Liverpool

that matter, before a vote or an election or a referendum or
anything, we will do what is necessary in order to achieve
that target. We are technocrats so we do what’s necessary.
If you don’t mind, I just want to clarify one thing. I think
most people are clear, but our commitment about not raising
interest rates, our commitment was not to raise interest rates
at least until unemployment got to 7% because we wanted to
secure that recovery. And what we said was we - once the
unemployment rate got to 7%, we would then look around,
take stock and decide where monetary policy needed to go.
And when we looked around and took stock, we saw a lot
more people who wanted to work than had jobs, we saw a lot
of people working part time that wanted to work full time, a
lot of people working self-employed that wanted to be in
regular employment. We saw a lot of people on zero hour
contracts. We saw a lot of flexibility - a lot of additional
capacity in the labour market. It didn’t make sense to raise
interest rates was our judgement then, and it’s been
absolutely vindicated by the performance of the economy
since.
Frances O’Grady:

Thanks very much, Mark. Two more questions. One from
PCS on taxation, and one from SCP on housing.

Question:

Thanks, Frances. Good morning, Mr Carney. PCS represents
over 50,000 workers in Revenue and Customs. An estimate
is that there's over £120bn in tax avoided, evaded and
uncollected. We hope you’re making the case with the
government that in this situation HMRC should employ more
staff rather than cut jobs, in order to enable this tax to be
collected.

Page 22
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech at TUC Congress, Liverpool

But our question to you as the Governor of the Bank of
England is this: the richest 10% pay a lower share of their
income in tax than the poorest 10%. Do you believe there is
a case for making the tax system more redistributive?
Applause
Patricia Schooling, The SCP:

Ordinary people are struggling to buy their own homes as a
result of the so-called housing bubble. This is a huge
problem for young workers who are low paid and often paying
off university debts. Is the Bank of England planning to take
any steps to take the heat out of the housing market? And
will the rise in interest rates make the situation better or
worse?

Applause
Mark Carney, Governor:

Let me - I’ll start with the housing and then I’ll go to
inequality. Let me say first about housing, we have a range
of tools at the Bank of England. The Bank of England has
changed in recent years. It use to be that we basically could
just vary interest rates, and one of the challenges was there
might be a temptation to use interest rates against an issue
such as you’re describing in the housing market,
unsustainable growth as described in house prices.
We now have another range of tools that we can use and so
we can preserve interest rates, monetary policy for achieving
inflation, but achieving the inflation target in a way that
supports jobs and growth, and that’s what we’re doing.
So what are we doing on housing and how do we view that
situation? What we did on housing in June was that we took
a series of steps that in effect took out insurance against
developments in the housing market that wouldn’t be
consistent with the long-term growth of this economy. We

Page 23
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech at TUC Congress, Liverpool

restricted banks’ ability to make risky loans, risky pay, risk
mortgages, we capped the amount of those mortgages that
they could do. Working with other agencies, we’re making
sure that banks do proper credit checks and credit analysis so
they’re concentrating their resources on people who deserve
those mortgages, and we’re making sure that those
mortgages are being shocked to higher interest rates, so that
when people get a new mortgage they know that they can
pay that mortgage if interest rates adjust.
The consequence of all those measures, the intent was not to
target house prices per se; it wasn’t to stop the housing
market in their tracks. There's a number of you here who
know that housing markets in your region are just beginning
to recover. But it was to make sure that certain housing
markets - and certainly the housing market across this
country - doesn’t move unsustainably, supported by
unsustainable debts. That’s what we can do on the housing
market; we can take other steps. But let me also
acknowledge our limitations. We can’t build houses. The
fundamental problem in this housing market is a lack of
supply, and that’s going to take efforts from many others for
many, many years in order to address the lack of supply.
With respect to inequality, I'm afraid on fiscal policy and tax
policy it’s not our responsibility. We have many
responsibilities and I've just talked about housing, but it’s not
one of our responsibilities. So I'm not going to drift into
dictating tax policy. But these issues have real consequences
for our policies. The shift in wage growth, more rapid wage
growth at the upper end, tepid or negative wage growth at
the lower end, that affects inflation. We need to understand
that. That affects our monetary policy. It’s one of the
reasons why one would expect this more gradual path even
though the economy is growing.

Page 24
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech at TUC Congress, Liverpool

And I am going to repeat myself that again it goes back to who has the debts in this economy? What’s their ability to
service those debts? What does that mean if there's too
rapid of an adjustment in interest rates? And what does that
mean for the sustainability of the economy? We’re trying to
do everything we can to put in place the conditions so that
there is that growth that’s going to bring into place
sustainable wage increases for all.
Frances O’Grady:

Thanks very much, Mark. We’ve had lots and lots of
questions on the cost of living, so we’ve got just two now,
NUT and UCU.

Louise Regan,
National Union of Teachers:

International studies show that the greater the inequality in a
country, the worse its educational outcomes. In your
interview with William Keegan printed in our conference
programme you talked about your worries about a waste of
human capital in the UK. Do you accept that greater state
intervention to strengthen the economy and reduce inequality
will improve our children’s education and life chances?

Applause
Mahmoona Shah,
University & College Union:

The recent ONS upwards revision of the numbers on zero
hours contracts and the growth in low paid self-employment
revealed that the labour market picture is not as rosy as
previously thought. How will the Bank reflect this reality of
low pay and a disappearing middle in the quality of labour
market data, and plan for a fair and sustainable economy?

Applause
Mark Carney, Governor:

On the - let’s talk about the near term which is what you’re
raising, zero hour contracts, self-employment, part time,

Page 25
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech at TUC Congress, Liverpool

other figures. We’re taking all of those very much into
account, because if one just looked at the movement in the
unemployment rate and the speed of the movement in the
unemployment rate, one could draw a conclusion of a very
tight labour market, very tight dynamics in the labour
market. But by looking behind, by looking at the number of
people who want to work full time but still can only find part
time work, people moving into self-employment, the increase
in the participation rate, in the participation in the labour
market, more people coming in looking for work, and the
prospect of more of those coming, taking all of those factors
and others into account, that’s why we do still see slack in
this labour market, this 1% number I quoted.
Now there's a lot of uncertainty around that and we’re
learning with every day about exactly where that is, but
that’s why we see that and that’s why the judgement, the
collective judgement of the MPC, which is the committee of
the Bank that makes these decisions, has been to keep
interest rates where they are.
Now what I'm saying today is, consistent with what we’ve
said recently, is you can expect interest rates to start to go
up at some point, but it’s within the context of how that slack
is used up and what the prospects are for not just wage
increases but, you know, labour costs.
On - absolutely crucial questions around education. I can’t
stress enough, and you’d know this from your work and from
your colleagues, how wasteful - you know there's nothing
worse than wasting human capital. Now I sound like an
economist in saying it that way, but wasting a life, wasting
skills and people losing that.
Now there were two challenges. The first challenge after this
recession was first to keep people in work as much as

Page 26
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech at TUC Congress, Liverpool

possible, because people lose their skills if they’re out of
work, it’s just a reality, it’s an unfortunate reality. And we in
the UK have done better than others, versus anyone else, in
keeping people in work. But that’s not enough. The whole
point is around lifelong learning, building on the base that the
teachers give employees. And it is from early childhood
education, it’s through formal education, but it is very much a
skills agenda that evolves through lifetime, and it’s not just
for those in work, it’s for those out of work and it has to be
available for all which is why I wanted to stress that at the
end.
And I’ll just hammer the point if I may, which is that our
contribution to the pay rise for which you’re looking, is to
ensure that you get that which the economy today can
sustain. But it’s not clear you should be satisfied with that.
That’s the extent of what the Bank of England can do. The
question is how do you raise the level of pay that the
economy can sustain? And part of the way you do it is
through that - through a very equal and broad based
investment in skills throughout an individual’s lifetime.
Frances O’Grady:

Okay, thank you, Mark. I’d like to take a question from
USDAW next on independence.

Jeff Broome, USDAW:

With less than two weeks until the people of Scotland vote in
the independence referendum, would an independent
Scotland be able to remain in the currency union with the rest
of the UK? And if not, what might be the consequences to
the Scottish economy?

Mark Carney, Governor:

Well you know I went to Edinburgh in January and I gave a
speech on this subject, on the economics of currency unions.
And basically in that speech I said there are three
components of a successful currency union. First you have to

Page 27
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech at TUC Congress, Liverpool

have free movement of capital and labour, and goods and
services, trade across the various parts of the currency union.
Secondly you need something called the banking union, in
other words you need the same regulation, the same
supervision, the same standards in the banking sector. And
you very importantly need the institutions that stand behind
those banks, the lender of last resort which is the central
bank, deposit guarantee scheme, if it’s credible. You need all
those institutions to be common.
And thirdly you need some form of fiscal arrangement. So
you need tax, revenues and spending flowing across those
borders to help equalise to some extent the inevitable
fluctuations, differences in the various economies. I think we
only have to look across the Channel at what happens if you
don’t have all of those components in place. So that’s just
the economics of it, that outlines the economics of it.
You know, I've said this before, but we take note of the
positions of all the major Westminster parties to rule out a
currency union between an independent Scotland and the rest
of the UK. So it’s in that context, just to put it together, in
that context a currency union is incompatible with
sovereignty.
Frances O’Grady:

Okay, thank you.

Applause
Frances O’Grady:

I think we can sneak in just one more from Prospect please.

Lorna Daniel, Prospect:

Good afternoon, Mr Carney. Last July when you announced
that Jane Austen would be featuring on the £10 bank note
you also made a welcome commitment that future bank notes
should celebrate the full diversity of great British historical

Page 28
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech at TUC Congress, Liverpool

figures, and their contributions in a wide range of fields. Do
you think this commitment to greater diversity should include
the composition of the Monetary Policy Committee?
Applause
Mark Carney, Governor:

Well I do actually; I think I've said that. No, let me say a
couple of things. First it was striking when I first came to the
Bank that the level of the gender balance in the senior ranks
of the institution was not what I would have expected, nor
does the staff of the Bank yet fully reflect the diversity, the
broader diversity, of the United Kingdom. And so what have
we done? And I should note that decisions of who is on the
Monetary Policy Committee or any of our other committees
are not for the senior management of the Bank, but for the
government, for the Chancellor. And that in the last year I
am very pleased that Kristin Forbes and Minouche Shafik both
have joined and they’re both excellent colleagues.
What we can influence though at the Bank, and what we have
been influencing, is the composition of our workforce. And
here’s what we’ve done, and you know it’s 15 months but
here’s what we’ve done. The year before in our graduate
intake about a quarter of new hires were female. In the most
recent graduate intake which came in in August, just under
half were female. In our senior management ranks, the top
50 senior managers, a fifth were female. Now it’s about a
third.
We’ve set up specific taskforce targets. We’re actively
recruiting to get a balance. As you would expect, we have a
strategic plan. This is one of our fundamental objectives of
the strategic plan is that our workforce at the Bank of
England fully reflects the diversity of the United Kingdom,
because it’s not just the right thing to do, it will make us
much, much more effective. And it’s going to take years to

Page 29
Mark Carney, Governor - Speech at TUC Congress, Liverpool

do it. We’ve made a good start but it’s - I'm glad to end with
that question because it’s fundamental to what we need to
do. So thank you.
Frances O’Grady:
Applause
END

Thank you.

