Meeting the Challenges of Economic Recovery
Speech given by
Andrew Sentence, Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England

At the Scottish Council for Development and Industry Dinner, Aberdeen
10 June 2009

I would like to thank Michael Hume and Abi Hughes for research assistance and I am also grateful for
helpful comments from other colleagues. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily
reflect those of the Bank of England or other members of the Monetary Policy Committee.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. It is a great pleasure for me to be speaking here
in Aberdeen on the eve of your major Economic Summit tomorrow for the Aberdeen
City and Shire. I am particularly pleased to be returning to this part of the world after
a long absence. Around thirty years ago, my family lived in Aberdeen – when my
father was working with a major engineering company supporting the oil industry.
Before that, I had spent four months living and working in Aboyne on Deeside in my
gap year between school and university in 1977.

Clearly, a lot has changed since those days. I moved to Aberdeen with my family in
the late 1970s just after the Labour government of the day had held a referendum on
Scottish devolution. Thirty years on, you now have a well-established devolved
government in this country. The modern Scottish Parliament recently celebrated its
tenth anniversary – re-establishing a Scottish parliamentary tradition which goes back
to the 13th century.

Alongside these political changes, the last thirty years has been a period of massive
economic change – both across the United Kingdom as a whole and in Aberdeen and
the surrounding region. When I first spent some time in this area in 1977, North Sea
Oil production was only just getting underway.1 Now, North-East Scotland is the
fifteenth most successful economic region in the European Union, and the third
richest in the UK, measured in terms of value-added per head of population.2 This
fact appears to be a fairly well-kept secret outside this part of the world – and maybe
you should make more of it. It is a record of economic success that Aberdeen and the
whole North-East of Scotland should be very proud of.

At tomorrow’s Summit, you will be discussing how the City and Shire of Aberdeen
can sustain and improve this strong economic position. I very much hope that this is a
very productive day of discussions, and you certainly have a very impressive agenda.
Though I am not in a good position to advise you on the detail of your Summit
discussions, I would just like to make three general points which I hope will provide a
helpful backdrop to your sessions tomorrow.
1

Oil production started in the Argyll Field in June 1975, followed by the Forties Field in November
1975.
2
Source: Aberdeen City and Shire Economic Future website.

2

First, in my experience, successful regional economic strategies rely on very active
co-operation between the public and private sectors. The public sector is crucial in
providing the infrastructure which underpins economic growth – including the
transport and education systems – as well as fulfilling many other key roles, including
local and regional planning. However, public investments and other policy
interventions will only be effective if they are based on a sound understanding of the
needs of the business community and the policy initiatives which will genuinely
enhance economic competitiveness. Ultimately, it will be profitable and competitive
businesses which will underpin job creation, prosperity and the broader success of the
economy in this region and elsewhere. Successful co-operation between the public
and private sectors will be crucial for the future success of your efforts to promote the
economic prospects of Aberdeen City and Shire.

Second, your future strategy needs to be consistent with the Low Carbon Economy of
the future, in which greenhouse gas emissions are cut substantially in relation to
current levels. The Committee on Climate Change has recommended an 80% cut in
carbon dioxide and other emissions which contribute to global warming by 2050.
That is a particular challenge for this City and its surrounding economy, which has
developed recently on the basis of the extraction of fossil fuels.

However, the

capabilities of the technology and service industries which have helped to extract oil
and gas from the North Sea can also serve to meet the requirements of a Low Carbon
Economy – for example, by developing offshore wind power and the capture and
storage of carbon emissions. I am sure that the need to embrace the challenges of a
Low Carbon Economy will be an important feature of your discussions tomorrow.

Third, I am very conscious of the pressures which the current financial crisis and
recession has created for businesses and individuals. However, in your discussions
tomorrow, I hope you will be able to look through these short-term challenges and
focus on the medium and long-term issues which will shape economic prosperity over
the medium to long-term. Indeed, one thing that has encouraged me greatly in this
recession is the confidence which businesses are showing in their medium and longerterm economic prospects. Though a lot of businesses are having to take drastic

3

actions to survive in the face of a sharp fall-off in demand, at the same time we are
seeing many companies seeking to safeguard their long-term investments and
maintain workforce skills built up over many years. In my view, this reflects both a
feeling of confidence about the underlying viability of their business and a desire to
be well-positioned for the recovery when it comes. On both counts, this is a good
sign of the resilience and underlying strength of the British economy – and I hope
your Summit discussions tomorrow will help to provide an additional underpinning
for longer-term confidence among businesses in the City and Shire of Aberdeen.

In previous recessions, there have not always been such good grounds for confidence
in the longer-term prospects for the UK economy. I think back particularly to the
recession of the early 1980s, which was just beginning when my family lived here in
Aberdeen. That recession followed a dismal period for the UK economy and British
industry, which saw businesses struggling with double-digit inflation, bad industrial
relations, low productivity and a legacy of underinvestment in skills, new technology
and product development. These were widely regarded as symptoms of a wider
economic malaise – the “British disease”. When the early-1980s recession hit, these
structural problems led many businesses to lose confidence, not just in shorter-term
economic prospects, but in the long-term future viability of their UK businesses. This
was particularly the case in UK manufacturing industry, and was reflected in the
widespread plant closures, business failures and a significant contraction in the UK
manufacturing base at that time.3

Over the decade and a half that followed, these underlying economic problems were
addressed. Over the 1980s and early 1990s, inflation was brought under control and
we now have a well-established framework for sustaining low and stable inflation,
underpinned by an independent decision-making body – the Monetary Policy
Committee of the Bank of England.

The UK labour market has become more

flexible, following on from changes to industrial relations and other reforms. We are
seeing some of the benefits of increased flexibility in the current recession, as
companies have sought to minimise lay-offs by negotiating temporary changes to pay

3

Sentance and Emerson (1995) argue that UK manufacturing capacity dropped by around 10%
between the late 1970s and early 1980s.

4

and hours of work. This co-operative approach is not only helping individuals and
companies manage through the recession. But it should also help to reduce the loss of
skills and experience that comes about through job losses and prolonged
unemployment – providing a stronger skill and employment base for the economy
when the recovery comes.

Britain also now has a much more productive, competitive, innovative and flexible
core of manufacturing and international trading businesses than in the 1970s and
1980s. I have been particularly impressed by the manufacturing businesses I have
visited all around the United Kingdom in my last two-and-a-half years on the
Monetary Policy Committee.

British manufacturing has learned the benefits of

investing heavily in technology and skills, using lean manufacturing techniques
coupled with flexible employment patterns. Like many in this audience I am sure, I
wish we had more of these companies here in Scotland and elsewhere in the UK. But
in my view, the productivity and competitiveness of our manufacturing base has
improved out of all recognition over the last three decades.

These three features of our economy – a track record of low and stable inflation, a
more flexible labour market and a productive and competitive base of manufacturing
and international trading businesses – should give us grounds for encouragement
about the ability of the UK economy to weather the storms of the current recession.
There are nonetheless some very considerable challenges ahead when the economy
starts to recover, which I hope will very soon be the case. These challenges share
some common characteristics with the situation the UK economy faced in the 1990s
economic recovery. But they also reflect the unusual nature of the current global
financial crisis, which has been the main driver of this recession.

The first and most obvious challenge is the potential constraint on lending because of
the reluctance of banks to lend as they seek to rebuild their financial reserves. In the
case of the UK, there are two aspects to this. First, there is a gap in the supply of
lending which has been created by the withdrawal of some foreign banks which were
very active in providing finance in the UK before the crisis – particularly in terms of

5

lending to business. A number of these banks have retreated to their home markets
and are reluctant to provide new lending within the UK.

The impact of this adverse shift in the supply of new lending could be offset by an
increased supply of credit from UK-based banks – but they too are likely to be much
more cautious about future lending in the wake of significant losses arising from the
financial crisis. These losses have weakened their capital base and there are worries
that further losses may emerge as a result of the recession. In one sense, it is a
sensible reaction for banks to restrain lending in the current situation. It would be
unreasonable to expect banks to lend as freely as they did in the mid-2000s when it is
now clear that they were seriously underestimating credit risks. However, if the
pendulum swings too far in the other direction – and sound businesses and households
with a good credit record are unable to access lending – that risks impairing the
growth of the economy during the recovery.

A second challenge we will face in the coming recovery is the need for the UK
economy to rebalance its sources of growth after a period when economic activity has
been strongly driven by financial activity and by a sustained period of rising public
and private consumption.

There are a number of aspects to this process of rebalancing. The first is in terms of
the sources of demand. Growth in the UK economy in the late 1990s and early 2000s
was strongly driven by private consumer spending, and this has been reinforced more
recently by rising spending on public services.

Normally, public and private

consumption in the UK runs at just over four-fifths of economic activity, leaving just
under one-fifth to be reinvested in the productive capacity of the economy.4 As Chart
1 shows, the proportion of national output devoted to private and public consumption
rose significantly above its historic average level in the late 1990s and early 2000s –
with 85-86% of national resources being devoted to consumption compared with a
historic average of 82%. More recently, the consumption ratio has risen further – to

4

In the fifty years from 1955 to 2004, the total of private consumer spending and public spending on
current goods and services averaged 82% of UK GDP when measured at current market prices.

6

nearly 88% – the highest ratio of consumption to national output in the UK since the
early 1950s!

Chart 1: Public and private consumption as a share of GDP
%
89
88
87
86
85
84
83
82
81
80
79
Q1 1980

Q1 1986

Q1 1992

Q1 1998

Q1 2004

Note: Measured at current market prices.
Source: ONS

For a time, it may be possible for an economy to spend more than it earns, and to
borrow abroad. But that is more likely to be the case when the additional spending is
the result of investment which will yield a future return, rather than a high level of
current consumption of goods and services.

Some of the recent rise in the

consumption ratio is short-term and reflects the recession itself. Public spending is
being sustained through the recession and consumer spending is normally one of the
more resilient components of demand in a downturn. In a recession, the stability of
public and private consumption helps offset the volatility of investment spending and
acts stabilise the economy.
But there is a longer-term element to this imbalance in the amount the UK economy
consumes in relation to the amount it produces.

This reflects the very strong

consumer-driven growth we saw in the UK between the mid-1990s and the mid2000s, which has been reinforced by recent rises in public spending. The second half
of the 1990s and the first half of this decade saw private consumer spending growing
at over 3.5% per annum. This was a full one percentage point over the longer-run
trend and represents the strongest ten-year period of household consumption since the

7

Second World War.5 As a result of the boost to domestic demand created by rising
consumer spending, the UK economy was one of a number of major economies –
including the United States and Spain – which developed a significant current account
deficit in the mid-2000s, reflecting the fact that our national spending habits had
outpaced the productive potential of our economy over this period.6

In the wake of the current financial crisis, we should expect to see a move in the
opposite direction – subdued growth of private and public consumption as the
economy rebalances. An important contribution to this demand side rebalancing will
be the reduction in the very large public sector deficits which are now projected for
the UK – reaching around 12% of GDP this year and next.7 Fiscal consolidation will
require restraint on the growth of public spending and, if taxes have to rise, it will
have an impact on private consumer spending too.8

Given the scale of excess

consumption which has built up over the last decade, and the large fiscal imbalances
which are now apparent, tight fiscal policies are likely to need to be sustained for 5-10
years.

We have been here before – in the 1990s economic recovery.

Then, the UK

experienced a similar period of demand rebalancing but from a less extreme position,
both in terms of the level of consumption in relation to GDP and the size of the fiscal
deficit.9 Just as in the mid-1990s, a competitive exchange rate is likely to help with
the rebalancing of the UK economy – supporting UK manufacturers and other
businesses trading internationally in export markets, as well as giving UK producers a
competitive advantage over importers.

5

The strongest post-war ten-year period for final household consumption was between 1996 and 2005
when real growth averaged 3.7%. See Sentance (2007) for a fuller discussion.
6
See Hume and Sentance (2009) for a fuller discussion of the evolution of current account imbalances
over the period since the mid-1990s, and their linkages to the global credit boom which emerged at the
same time.
7
The 2009 Budget statement projected Public Sector Net Borrowing at 12.4% of GDP in 2009/10 and
11.9% in 2010/11.
8
Tax rises directed towards the corporate sector could also squeeze investment, which would harm the
longer-term growth potential of the economy.
9
The budget deficits in the early 1990s (as measured by Public Sector Net Borrowing) peaked at 7-8%
of GDP. Also, see Sentance (1992) for a discussion of the rebalancing challenge in the UK in the early
1990s.

8

Another aspect of the rebalancing of the UK economy which we are likely to see over
the next few years is a reduction in dependence on financial and business services as a
source of growth. The late 1990s and early to mid-2000s saw not only a global credit
boom, but also a broader expansion in the size of the financial sector and related
business activities.10 As Chart 2 shows, the share of financial and business services in
UK GDP rose from around 17% in the mid-1990s to about 25% at present. As the
financial sector and related activities adjust to the changed circumstances in the wake
of the current financial crisis, we cannot expect these sectors to be such a powerful
engine of growth in the coming recovery. Other sectors will need to take up the
running.

Chart 2: Financial and business services as a share of GDP
%
27
25
23
21
19
17
15
1985

1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

Note: Measured at current market prices.
Source: ONS

In summary, therefore, the activities which provided the momentum behind the
growth of the UK economy over the last decade – strong consumer spending and the
growth of financial services and related activities – are likely to be much weaker
sources of growth as the economy rebalances over the coming recovery. Other
internationally trading sectors will need to pick up the baton from financial services –
notably manufacturing industry.

And the prospect of weaker consumer demand

means that the UK recovery is likely to be more dependent on overseas demand and
10

See Hume and Sentance (2009)

9

the growth of investment. And though a competitive pound should provide UK
producers with a competitive edge, a sustained return to growth here in the UK will
depend on a broader recovery in the global economy.

This process of structural change in the economy is a necessary fact of economic life.
But it is not smooth and painless. We know, from the experience of the UK economy
in the 1980s and 1990s when shifts in the structure of the economy were also taking
place, that it takes time for dynamic new industries to become established and replace
jobs lost in the recession. We should therefore brace ourselves for a period when
unemployment is probably higher than its natural or normal level for a while. Local
and regional initiatives – such as the Aberdeen City and Shire Economic Future – can
play an important part in helping the economy adjust, so that the growth of new
sources of employment can replace lost jobs in contracting or slower growing sectors.

A third challenge which I see for the coming UK recovery is that it is likely to occur
against a background of continued global volatility, reflecting the highly integrated
nature of our global economic system. In a paper which is released today alongside
this speech, my Bank of England colleague Michael Hume and I argue that the global
credit boom – which has burst so spectacularly over the last eighteen months – was
nurtured and encouraged by a number of aspects of the globalisation we have seen
over the last two decades.11 The globalisation and the liberalisation of the financial
sector itself contributed to the expansionary attitude of many banks and their tendency
to underplay the risks attached to their lending and financial asset holdings.
More generally, globalisation played an important part in creating the economic
climate in which the global credit bubble of the 2000s inflated. As China and India
and other low-cost producers joined the world trading system, their low production
costs and plentiful labour supply acted to dampen inflationary pressures across the
global economy in the late 1990s and the first half of this decade. The relaxed
monetary policies which ensued across the global economy in the first half of this
decade – led by the United States – helped to prolong and sustain a global credit boom
which had started in the late 1990s through the early 2000s and into the middle years
11

See Hume and Sentance (2009) for a detailed analysis of the recent global credit boom and its
relationship to globalisation, global imbalances and the macro-economic environment in the 1990s and
2000s.

10

of this decade. Subdued inflation accompanied by sustained economic growth also
helped to perpetuate the view in the financial sector that a new era of macro-economic
stability had arrived, contributing to the downplaying of lending risks.

Of course, many other factors played a part in the evolution of the global financial
market development of the last decade.

But the globalisation of economic and

financial activity may also have inadvertently increased our exposure to volatility
originating in global markets. And the globally integrated economic system in which
the current financial crisis developed may have other shocks in store for us in the
future.

What conclusions should you draw from this analysis, as you enter your day of
discussions at tomorrow’s economic Summit?

The first conclusion I would like to suggest is a positive one. As I emphasised earlier,
some of the more fundamental changes which have taken place in recent decades
should underpin longer-term confidence for the future. We have successfully created
a climate of low and relatively stable inflation, and as a member of the Monetary
Policy Committee, I am personally committed to seeing that continue to be an
underpinning of a stable business climate. The UK economy is not going back to the
bad old days of the “British disease”, in my view. We have an internationally
competitive manufacturing base – albeit one that may need to expand to underpin
future growth – and our flexible labour markets should serve us in good stead, both to
help sustain employment through the recession and to facilitate the shift in
employment which needs to underpin the rebalancing of the UK economy over the
course of the recovery.

However, there are significant challenges which could potentially act as headwinds to
the recovery in the UK economy. First, the recovery of the UK economy will need to
take place with a banking system which will not be firing on all cylinders. Second,
the rebalancing of the economy means we cannot rely so heavily on the sources of
growth which have powered the UK economy in the past decade – consumer spending
and financial and business services. There will, however, be compensating

11

opportunities for businesses which can successfully trade on overseas markets –
particularly where they can tap the potential of the dynamic emerging markets of
Asia, including China and India.

Third, we should not be surprised to see continued volatility affecting our economic
lives as a result of global economic developments. The backdrop to my time on the
Monetary Policy Committee has been unprecedented global volatility – both affecting
inflation, through oil and commodity prices – and economic growth – with the
recession induced by the current financial crisis. We should not expect that we have
seen an end to this global volatility which has its roots in the integration of world
markets and the challenge of absorbing China, India and other emerging markets into
the global economic system.

Over the last nine months, the Monetary Policy Committee has been focussed on
providing support to demand – through dramatic and unprecedented cuts in interest
rates over the autumn and winter – and more recently through our current policy of
“Quantitative Easing”. This programme of substantial asset purchases aims to boost
the money supply to support spending in the economy, going beyond the stimulus that
can be provided by very low interest rates. I am confident that these policies will help
to support economic recovery – through their effect on asset prices, financial
conditions and ultimately spending by households and firms.

It is encouraging that in recent months we have seen some promising signs that the
recession – here in the UK and globally – may now be bottoming out. And we should
be able to look forward to a recovery beginning either later this year or early in 2010.
The big shocks to global consumer and business confidence which we saw last
autumn are now beginning to wear off. At the same time, the very big policy stimulus
that has been provided by fiscal and monetary authorities around the world should
now be beginning to be felt. The shift in the economic data is consistent with this
change in the balance of forces affecting the economy, though we cannot yet predict
the exact timing and strength of the recovery which will eventually emerge.

12

One thing is essential, however. When the recovery does come, it needs to be
underpinned by a continuation of the low and stable inflation we have generally
experienced in the UK since the 1990s. That is a key responsibility for the Monetary
Policy Committee. An underpinning of low inflation should help ensure that recovery
can be sustained – which in turn is a key issue for business confidence and future
prosperity in the longer term.

13

References
Hume, M., and Sentance, A. (2009), "The Global Credit Boom: Challenges for Macroeconomics and
Policy", External MPC Unit Discussion Paper No. 27, Bank of England, June.
Sentance, A. (1992), "Rebalancing the British Economy", The Business Economist, Vol. 24, No. 1,
Winter.
Sentance, A. and Emerson, R. (1995), "Manufacturing Capacity and Investment: Is there a
Constraint?", Foundation for Manufacturing and Industry Research Paper, August.
Sentance, A. (2007), "The Changing Pattern of Savings: Implications for Growth and Inflation", The
Royal Bank of Scotland/Scottish Economic Society Annual Lecture, reprinted in the Bank of England
Quarterly Bulletin, Q2.

14

