Speech given by
Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England

At Salts Mills, Bradford, Yorkshire
13 June 2005

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

1
While I was growing up in the West Riding, Salts Mill was still thriving, although the year
I left Yorkshire was the year in which the Salts Group was taken over. As the textile
industry declined, so did the fortunes of Salts Mill and closure became inevitable. Since
then the wheel of fortune has turned full circle. The remarkable vision and energy of
Jonathan Silver and his family have converted the mill from a daily reminder of the decline
of the Bradford textile industry into an extraordinary example of urban regeneration.
Tonight I want to talk about the results of another spin of the wheel of fortune. In its time,
Titus Salt’s mill was the response to globalisation in the nineteenth century. Salt decided to
specialise in importing alpaca wool from Peru and turning it into the finest fabrics in the
country for sale at home and abroad. Today, almost every company in Britain is affected
by globalisation. And the experience of every successful economy since the end of the
second world war shows that our ability to embrace globalisation is the key to higher living
standards.
Three aspects of this increasing integration of economies are particularly important for the
Bank of England when it sets monetary policy: the impact of new sources of production
overseas on prices in the high street; the influence of falls in import prices on the growth of
consumer spending; and the role of migrant labour in easing wage pressure in a tight labour
market. Let me take these in turn.
First, despite rapid growth of domestic demand over a number of years, inflation has
remained low. Over the past year consumer prices as a whole have risen by a fraction less
than the target for inflation of 2%, and the prices of goods hardly at all. Until recently,
import prices have played a part in keeping inflation low. Falling import prices affected
inflation directly, by lowering the prices of the imported goods that we consume, and
indirectly, by increasing competitive pressure on domestically produced goods, and by
lowering the cost of imported inputs such as raw materials and machines. So why have our
imports become cheaper?
Some of the countries from which we import have experienced extraordinary rates of
productivity growth. That has allowed them to reduce production costs and the prices at
which they sell to us. Such a surge in productivity growth is not unprecedented. Between

2
1800 and 1850 there was a staggering increase in the productivity of textile manufacturing
in Britain. All the processes involved in transforming raw wool into finished cloth –
combing, spinning and weaving - were, one by one, mechanised. That led to a huge
increase in the output of textiles and a large fall in their price, thus stimulating demand
further. Between 1800 and 1850 the output of the UK textile industry increased seven-fold,
and the price of textiles relative to other goods fell by three quarters. Over time
productivity in other countries caught up, as technology and capital were exported from the
UK. As other countries became more efficient at producing textiles, the industry in the UK
went into decline. At its peak in 1821, the UK textile industry accounted for 14% of
national income. In 2004, it represented only 1%. That decline meant a painful process of
adjustment for those in the industry – not least in and around Bradford - but new jobs were
created in other industries. Salts Mill in Bradford and Dean Clough in Halifax are
examples of successful regeneration. Unemployment in Bradford, as in the country as a
whole, is close to its lowest level for a generation. And our living standards are
undoubtedly higher today than if we had attempted to retain the industrial structure of the
nineteenth or early twentieth centuries.
East Asia is now the dominant producer of textiles. China has doubled its share of world
textile exports over the past 15 years, and now accounts for one fifth of world textile trade.
And that share is likely to increase further following the lifting of trade restrictions on
textile imports from China at the beginning of this year which led to an immediate jump in
imports into the US and Europe. China is now importing the technology and capital that
will raise productivity towards levels of more traditional industrialised nations. The new
technology adopted at Salts Mill and elsewhere led to cheaper textiles around the world;
now the advent of China and India to the world trading system is reducing prices of
imported textiles and other goods. As a result, the prices of imported goods have been
falling, contributing to low inflation in Britain.
The second implication of economic integration, and one that follows directly from the
first, is that falling import prices helped to boost real disposable incomes and hence
consumer spending. Industrialisation in China and elsewhere has benefited British
consumers. For much of the past decade, the terms on which we were able to trade with the

3
rest of the world moved in our favour. In other words, the average price of our exports rose
relative to the price of our imports. And that enabled consumer spending to rise faster than
national output. From 1997 until around 2002 consumer spending rose at an average rate of
almost 4% a year, whereas GDP rose at an average annual rate of less than 3%. But over
the past two to three years the improvement in our terms of trade has been less marked. At
the same time real income growth slowed. The result, inevitably, was that consumption
spending also moderated. And since the turn of the year a more pronounced slowing has
become evident.
The third effect of increased economic integration is its impact on the labour market. An
economy which is open to migrant labour exhibits a different inflationary process from one
that is not. Changes in interest rates affect inflation in part through their effect on the
balance between total demand and the supply capacity of the economy – a balance
described by some economists as the output gap. An increase in spending raises the
pressure of demand on supply and leads to upward pressure on wages and prices. But if the
increased demand for labour generates its own supply in the form of migrant labour then
the link between demand and prices is broken, or at least altered. Indeed, in an economy
that can call on unlimited supplies of migrant labour the concept of the output gap is
meaningless.
The UK is not in that extreme position, but the inflow of migrant labour, especially in the
past year or so from Eastern Europe, has probably led to a diminution of inflationary
pressure in the labour market relative to previous experience. Comprehensive and accurate
statistics on all migrant workers are not available, but we do have some information that
illustrates the increasing importance of inflows of migrant labour. The Home Office
estimates that around 120,000 workers entered the UK from the new member countries of
the European Union between May 2004 and March 2005. That is not far short of the
average annual increase in the labour force over the past decade. Without this influx to fill
the skill gaps in a tight labour market it is likely that earnings would have risen at a faster
rate, putting upward pressure on the costs of employers and, ultimately, inflation.

4
The impact of globalisation in those three areas – on prices in the high street, on real
incomes and consumer spending, and on wage costs – is central to monetary policy today.
And some of that impact is starting to unwind. What does this mean for the future path of
interest rates? The starting point is that inflation is very close to target and the economy is
still growing at a rate not far from its long-run average. But final domestic demand growth
has weakened for five consecutive quarters. Some easing was desirable in order to bring
about a rebalancing of the economy after a prolonged period during which domestic
demand had grown much faster than output, and should help to reduce our trade deficit
which is now between 3 and 4% of national income. But inevitably it increases the
uncertainty about whether the pattern of growth in the future will be as smooth as we have
experienced over the past decade.
Those concerns have been fuelled by the sharp slowing of consumer spending in recent
months. The weakness in sales of goods on the high street - from clothes to cars - has been
marked. Nevertheless, consumption of services appears, at least so far, to be more resilient.
So it is possible that we are seeing a temporary slowdown in spending on durable and semidurable goods – such as household goods, cars and clothes – as households come to terms
with the prospect of somewhat lower income growth in future.
The risks around that view are the key to policy. One downside risk to activity and
inflation is the immediate outlook for consumer spending. If the weakness in spending on
goods were to spread to services then the slowdown in consumption growth might be more
protracted. Given the historically low level of national savings in the UK, and the
increasing awareness of the need to provide for the future, it is possible that an increase in
savings has already begun. While that would be a positive development for the UK in the
long term, it would imply slower growth of domestic demand in the short run.
But there are also upside risks to inflation. First, broad money has been rising rapidly in
the UK, and in recent months its growth rate has risen further. In the first quarter of this
year it rose at an annualised rate of nearly 13%, more than twice as fast as in the US and
euro area. And in real terms it is rising more rapidly than at any point since 1997. That
represents an upside risk to domestic demand.

5
Second, the downward pressure on inflation from falls in import prices may have come to
an end. Import prices, which had been falling for several years, started to rise in the second
half of 2004 as the world economy grew strongly. And in the first quarter of this year
imported goods prices were 3.7% higher than a year ago. There is a risk that import prices
will continue to put upward pressure on inflation.
Third, the risks to labour costs seem to be on the upside. Private sector regular pay
growth has been subdued, which is somewhat puzzling in the context of 30 year-high
employment rates, and 30 year-low unemployment rates, which we would usually associate
with a tight labour market. It is possible, indeed likely, that inflows of migrant labour have
eased labour market pressure. But there is a risk that the effect of migrant labour on wage
costs may diminish if the inflows over the past year represented a one-off adjustment to the
new opportunities to work in Britain. And to the extent that those inflows helped to reduce
upward pressure on wage costs in a tight labour market, then equally the reversal of the
flows of migrant labour might reduce the downward impact of a softer labour market on
wage costs.
Judging the balance of those risks is a difficult task, but what matters most is that the
Monetary Policy Committee will react promptly to whichever of these risks appears to be
materialising in the months ahead. As a true Yorkshire batsman would say: be ready to
play on either foot , and keep your eye on the data.
If Titus Salt could join us today he would recognise not only his former mill, but also the
way in which globalisation affects prices, productivity and industrial structure. He would
appreciate too the importance of long run monetary stability that the inflation target aims to
achieve and that enables you to focus on your businesses, which are the true source of
rising living standards.

ENDS

