Models in macroeconomics
Speech given by
Silvana Tenreyro, External MPC Member, Bank of England

University of Surrey, Guildford
4 June 2018

The views are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the Monetary Policy Committee.
I would like to thank Oliver Ashtari Tafti, Riccardo Masolo, Michael McLeay, Francesca Monti and
Kate Reinold for their help producing this speech. I am also grateful to Thomas Belsham,
Lizzie Drapper, Tomas Key, Chris Redl, Michael Saunders, Marco Schneebalg, Martin Seneca,
Yad Selvakumar and Carlos Van Hombeeck for helpful comments. All errors are mine.

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

Introduction

Good evening everyone and thank you for having me today.

Perhaps unsurprisingly, following a decade of slow economic recovery from a painful financial crisis, the role
of economics and economists has been vociferously debated. A few weeks ago a newspaper article felt
obliged to ask the question “Has economics failed?”

1

Many critics have laid the blame on the tools that economists use – our models.

2 3

So, in my speech today, I

will attempt to shed some light on how and why economists use models. Specifically, I will focus on how they
are useful to me as a practitioner on the MPC. I will also outline some of the current challenges we face in
macroeconomic modelling. As I go through, I will illustrate how a wide range of economic models have been
useful in informing my recent policy votes.

On policy, I will emphasise three points. First, I expect that the tight labour market will continue to feed
through into domestic cost pressures – I think that fears of a breakdown in the relationship between slack
and inflation are misplaced. Second, although we have seen some unexpected weakness in the recent
inflation and activity data, in my view, the most likely scenario is that the GDP news is short-lived, and we will
need a limited and gradual tightening in Bank Rate over the next three years to keep demand growing in line
with supply. Third, since the picture for underlying demand should become clearer relatively soon, I was
comfortable leaving policy unchanged in our May meeting.

Before discussing how economic models have contributed to shaping this policy view, it might be helpful to
first explain what a model is! Models are essentially abstractions. They simplify what is actually going on by
removing unnecessary details.
4

An oft-used analogy is to think of models as maps. Maps simplify our complex world to small-scale, flat
figures. When used for travelling, a map can show us the route we need to follow, abstracting from a host of
information that is not essential to reach the destination. The map might be different (and more or less
stylised) depending on the means of transportation (think of your favourite bicycle, foot, train, bus or car
maps). In the same way, economic models might be different depending on the structure and characteristics
of the economy; policy instruments available; institutional constraints; etc.

1

Clark and Giles (2018) in the Financial Times.
For detailed arguments for and against many aspects of current macroeconomic modelling, see the 2018 special issue of Oxford
Review of Economic Policy on ‘Rebuilding macroeconomic theory’, as well as Romer (2016), Korinek (2017) and Christiano,
Eichenbaum and Trabandt (2018).
3
Vlieghe (2017) discusses a related set of criticisms of forecasting and Shafik (2017a, 2017b) defends expert opinion in general.
4
Many people have used the analogy before in different forms. One early example in the context of economics appears in
Joan Robinson’s (1962) Essays on the theory of economic growth p33.
2

2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

2

While maps have become more accurate with improved data and technology, we are still surprised by
unexpected delays, blocked roads or flooded paths. Similarly, economic models have improved with greater
computing power, econometric techniques and data availability, but there is still significant uncertainty that
cannot be eliminated. And of course, we need different maps for different purposes. Physical, topographic,
climate, political or thematic maps all help simplify our complex world in different ways. Analogously,
economists often resort to different models to think about different economic problems.

A brief history of macroeconomic models

The macroeconomic models currently used in central banks and in academia are a product of a long journey
over the past century or so. It would be impossible in a short speech to cover even a small fraction of the
many advances, twists, turns (and many dead ends) that have led us here. But to give some context to some
of the current debates, I will try to summarise a few of the key developments.

5

As with much in macroeconomics, the obvious place to start is with John Maynard Keynes, who published
his General Theory in the depths of the Great Depression in 1936. With its focus on demand management, it
arguably marked a clear break from earlier macroeconomic thought. It was also perhaps the single greatest
influence on post-war macroeconomic policies. As a result, the early macroeconomic models that were built
in support of those policies were resolutely “Keynesian” in nature. That legacy has continued to this day –
much of the thinking underlying macroeconomic modelling today is still influenced by his insights.

Despite its enduring impact, I expect that not many macroeconomic modellers will have spent too much time
wading through Keynes’s writing itself. Its influence has been more indirect. One reason why is that, rather
than formal mathematical models as is common today, Keynes’s arguments were advanced largely in prose.
And while plain English can make ideas more accessible, it can also introduce ambiguity. Indeed, ever since,
6

there have famously been debates in the profession over “what Keynes really meant”. Moreover, the prose
7

itself has been variously described as “complex”, “recondite”, and “plodding”. My colleague Andy Haldane
8

has discussed how central bank publications perform badly on standard readability metrics. Keynes’s
General Theory is likely to score poorly too.

Most students instead learn the interpretation of Keynes formalised in the simple (IS-LM) model of Hicks
(1937). Some have argued that this interpretation is not the right one, or at least misses some of the nuance
of the General Theory. But a major advantage of such formal mathematical models is that they can bring
greater clarity and precision: while many have disagreed that the IS-LM model was the right one, economists

5

For more general history of macroeconomics over much of this period, see for example Woodford (1999) or Blanchard (2000).
Krugman (2011) divides interpretations of the book into two broad subsets, which he labels “Book 1ers” and “Chapter 12ers”.
7
By, respectively, Woodford (1999), Eichengreen (1999) and Krugman (2006).
8
Haldane (2017).
6

3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

3

share an understanding of what the model means. Indeed, in such a global discipline as economics, maths
can also act as a lingua franca, reducing potential misunderstandings.

From the simple IS-LM framework, models evolved to match the rapidly expanding macroeconomic data
available. Around the same time, the first comprehensive sets of National Accounts were developed in the
UK and the US. Coupled with various technical advances in econometrics, these encouraged the
development of early macroeconomic models. For aggregate demand, these typically consisted of (IS)
blocks explaining each of consumption and investment, with another (LM) block explaining the asset market;
an empirical Phillips curve relationship determined how prices and wages responded to imbalances between
demand and supply. The models grew in importance and commensurately in size.

9

Large-scale macroeconomic models suffered a set of blows in the 1970s, which led to their falling rapidly out
of favour in most modelling carried out in universities. One issue was a set of damaging methodological
criticisms. In his famous “critique”, Lucas (1976) argued that the models’ equations were ill-suited to
evaluating changes in policy, since they were liable to change when the policies were altered.
A second challenge came from the real-world development of stagflation – the 1970s occurrence of high
inflation and unemployment. This was seen as evidence against existing models, which almost exclusively
featured negative Phillips curve relationships between inflation and unemployment. The models were quickly
adjusted to correct one cause of their breakdown – their failure to incorporate the effects of the large oil
shocks of the 1970s. But events also supported the broader arguments of Lucas and others, who had
expected that the Phillips curve would break down if policymakers attempted to exploit it by accommodating
inflationary shocks, since rational workers would begin to anticipate that behaviour and raise their wage
demands accordingly.

Different parts of the economics profession diverged in the paths they took to address the challenges posed
in the 1970s. The response in the academic literature has been described as a “revolution”. Researchers
developed new macroeconomic models that had microfoundations: they were built up from the optimal
decision-making behaviour of individual consumers and firms in the economy – which was thought more
likely to be invariant to changes in policy. And the agents in the models had forward-looking rational
expectations: at each point in time, they made decisions based on their best forecasts of future outcomes,
given the information currently available to them.
Model design always involves a trade-off between realism – and so complexity – and tractability.

10

The

modeller must therefore make choices over which details are unnecessary – and from which one can
9

By 1965, the Brookings econometric model had over 200 equations (including 75 identities) (Fromm and Klein, 1965).
The Bank of England’s quarterly model had nearly 300 equations in 1987 (Patterson et al, 1987).
10
Robinson (1962) described this trade-off when she stated “A model which took account of all the variegation of reality would of no
more use than a map at the scale of one to one.” She adapted her description from the amusing illustration of the same trade-off in
Lewis Carroll’s Sylvie and Bruno Concluded (1893): '”What do you consider the largest map that would be really useful?”
4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

4

abstract – and which should be included. For the early incarnations of the new dynamic, stochastic, general
equilibrium (DSGE) models, making them far more complex in some dimensions meant that they had to be
simpler along others. The prototype DSGE model, the “real business cycle model” of Kydland and Prescott
(1982), had only a few key variables and no role at all for monetary policy. Importantly, the model failed to
match key features of the data. Unsurprisingly, therefore, there was a more gradual evolution in the
modelling strategies used in policy institutions such as the Bank of England and the Federal Reserve in the
US. While they typically accepted some of the conceptual criticisms of their large-scale models, it was felt
more pragmatic to introduce some smaller adjustments to the existing frameworks, with the new models still
too simplified to produce useful forecasts or policy guidance.

11

Over the past 25 years, there has been a gradual convergence between models used in policy institutions
and in the academic literature. Building on the now dominant DSGE research methodology,
“New-Keynesian” models added the assumption that firms faced frictions preventing them from instantly
adjusting their prices or wages. This restored to the models the influence of monetary policy on aggregate
spending in the economy. Increased computing power and econometric advances allowed the development
of progressively larger New-Keynesian models.

12

Many traditional insights into the role of macroeconomic

policy were therefore recast in a set of models that avoided the 1970s criticisms, but also appeared to
realistically match many aspects of the macroeconomic data. In the 2000s many central banks, including the
Bank of England, switched to using these models as additional inputs into their forecasts and policy
discussions.

13

Why do we use models?

Models help us to understand the potential effects of policies, to assess and quantify different mechanisms
that might be at play and to consider interactions that might go beyond the direct or intended effects of the
policy. I will expand on each of these points in turn.

a) To think through the effects of policy

Good models help us clarify our intuition. When we want to know the effect of some action, we can often tell
stories or conjecture mechanisms that might lead to different answers. A model can help us understand what
might happen under different conditions and how different mechanisms might interact. An alternative option

“About six inches to the mile”.
“Only six inches!” exclaimed Mein Herr. “We very soon got to six yards to the mile…And then came the greatest idea of all! We actually
made a map of the country on the scale of a mile to the mile!”
“Have you used it much?” I enquired.
“It has never been spread out yet”, said Mein Herr: “the farmers objected: they said it would cover the whole country and shut out the
sunlight!””
11
Patterson et al, (1987), Pagan (2003), Brayton and Mauskopf (1987) and Brayton et al (1997).
12
Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) and Smets and Wouters (2007).
13
Harrison et al (2005) and Burgess et al (2013).
5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

5

might be to experiment. But this is not always possible when it comes to economics. That is doubly the case
when it comes to working out the effect of macroeconomic policy.

For macroeconomists, models are often the only way we can think through policy effects. And for an MPC
member, that means monetary policy. We are tasked with setting Bank Rate to ensure that inflation reaches
its 2% target. To work out how to do that, we need a good model of how Bank Rate affects the economy and
inflation.

We cannot just simply look at what happened to inflation when the MPC has increased Bank Rate before.
For one thing, the MPC typically increases Bank Rate precisely when we expect inflation to rise above its
target. So simply looking at the data will not disentangle the effect of the policy from the increase in inflation
that was already expected to happen.
Of course, clever econometricians – including many here at the University of Surrey – are able to find ways
around to separate out confounding effects such as these. A massive amount of work has found ingenious
ways to tease out ‘shocks’ to monetary policy from the data.
collective research effort.

15

14

I have even made my own contribution to this

But as policymakers, we are not in the business of trying to engineer such

shocks. Most of my job involves trying to set policy to respond in a predictable and well-understood way to
economic developments. To work out how the economy will respond to the effects of this systematic part of
monetary policy, we need to use models.

16

Moreover, the structure of the economy can change over time in ways that affect how policy works. Models
allow us to think through how this might happen.

Put differently, we often need models to try to work out the effects of impulses or interventions that we have
not observed happen before. (Or have not happened enough times to allow us to reliably infer what might
happen in future.) There will always be many models giving different answers. But we can try to judge which
models are better by asking which ones are better able to explain the phenomena we have seen in the
data.

17

b) Quantification

Often in macroeconomics there are many plausible stories as to why something has happened, or what
might happen in future. We can use models to make sense of the data and give quantitative estimates of the

14

Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (1996, 1999); Romer and Romer (2004); and, for the UK, Ellis, Mumtaz and Zabczyk (2013) and
Cloyne and Hürtgen (2016).
15
Olivei and Tenreyro (2007, 2010) and Tenreyro and Thwaites (2016).
16
See Christiano, Eichenbaum and Trabandt (2018) for a recent articulation of these points.
17
See Haldane (2018) on the possibility of using “Big Data” techniques to answer these questions
6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

6

size of different effects. To show how this can inform monetary policy, Chart 1 uses the Bank of England’s
COMPASS model to explain the behaviour of inflation over the past decade.
The chart divides up the observed inflation data into the different ‘shocks’ that are included in the model.
Essentially it is the model’s interpretation of the most likely drivers of inflation. For me, there are three main
points that I take from this chart.

Chart 1: COMPASS decomposition of annual CPI inflation

Monetary Policy
World
Inflation

Cost-push
Demand

Supply
Exchange rate

Percentage point
deviations from target
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

-3
2018

Source: Bank calculations.

First, I find the model’s interpretation of why inflation has evolved as it has quite plausible, as long as we do
not take it too literally. A key driver of the movements in inflation, according to the model, has been various
cost-push shocks (purple bars).

18

These caused above-target inflation in both 2008 and 2011-12, as well as

below-target inflation in 2009 and 2015-16. These shocks often stand in for factors that affect prices over
and above labour and capital costs, including changes in VAT and other costs not explicitly featured in the
model, such as energy costs. And indeed, Chart 2 shows that the contribution of the purple bars to inflation
is correlated with the peaks and troughs of oil-price inflation over the past decade or so.

18

These cost-push shocks consist of a wage mark-up shock and several different price mark-up shocks. Oil price increases, which do
not feature explicitly in the model, are likely to be identified as a combination of these shocks. This suggests one should be cautious in
taking the model interpretation too literally. See Burgess et al (2013) for further discussion.
7

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

7

Chart 2: Annual oil price inflation and COMPASS cost-push contribution to annual CPI inflation
100

Percentage point
contribution

Per cent

80

4
3

60

2

40
20

1

0

0

-20

-1

-40

-2

-60
-80
-100

Cost push contribution to CPI inflation (RHS)

-3

Oil price inflation (LHS)

-4

2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
Source: Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
Notes: Oil price is Brent crude in sterling terms.

Second, monetary policy looks to have been relatively successful in stabilising underlying inflation.
The MPC’s remit recognises that in the face of temporary shocks, attempting to keep inflation at target may
cause undesirable volatility in output. Since the effects of oil-price swings are transitory, there is a good case
for ‘looking through’ their impact on inflation. Cost shocks aside, the next biggest drivers of inflation during
the period were large negative shocks to demand (blue bars) in the years following the crisis, which were
broadly offset by a rapid loosening in monetary policy (orange bars).

19

And third, more recently, the exchange-rate has been pushing up on inflation since 2016. The model’s
interpretation of the data is consistent with that of the MPC: the fall in the pound after the EU referendum has
been the main driver of recent above-target inflation. This pick-up and subsequent easing of imported
inflation has been a feature of MPC forecasts ever since. But in the past few quarters, we have seen some
building evidence that import prices have been rising slightly less than we had expected (only by around half
of the increase in foreign export prices - Chart 3). For me, this may be one reason why CPI inflation has
recently fallen back faster than we had expected. And on balance, I expect some of this downside news to
persist. I therefore agreed with the MPC’s collective judgement in May that, conditional on current market
expectations for policy, the import-price contribution to CPI inflation is likely to be a little lower than in our
February forecast (Chart 4).

19

In principle, successful, systematic monetary policy might not appear at all in the model decomposition. The model contains a Taylor
rule that describes how monetary policy responds to deviations of inflation from its target as well as to positive or negative output gaps.
These systematic responses are already included in the demand (and other) shock bars in the decomposition – they would tend to
make them smaller than otherwise. But in practice, even though the rule is estimated based on past behaviour, it is likely to be too
simple to provide a good policy prescription following an event like the 2008 financial crisis. Interpreted via the rule, policy may appear
to place more weight on the output gap (Weale, 2016) and less weight on interest-rate smoothing than on average over the sample.
This behaviour appears as monetary policy shocks, even though it may just be a systematic monetary policy response that does not
follow a simple Taylor rule.
8

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

8

Chart 3 – Import prices and foreign export

Chart 4 – Import price inflation

prices
Percentage changes on a year earlier

Projection at the time of the February Report

25

Foreign export prices
in sterling terms

Projection consistent with MPC key judgements
in May
Percentage change on a year earlier

20
15
10

Import prices

5
0
-5
-10
2005

2008

2011

2014

2017

Sources: Bank of England, CEIC, Eurostat, ONS, Thomson
Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
Notes: See May 2018 Inflation Report for more details.

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
2021

Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.

c) Thinking about the entire macroeconomy as a system

The macroeconomy is a highly interconnected system where many aggregate variables depend on each
other. We often need models to help us make sense of what is happening in the data. Looking at simple
correlations can be misleading when trying to work out complicated causal logic.

To give a simple and topical example, with major implications for monetary policy, there has been much
discussion recently over the elusiveness of the Phillips curve.

20

The Phillips curve is an empirical model

describing a negative relationship between rates of inflation and unemployment. Or, in modern versions, a
positive relationship between inflation and the output gap (the difference between output and its potential).
Incidentally, William Phillips, the economist who first identified the correlation between inflation and slack,
was arguably the first economist to design an analogue computer (the MONIAC) to simulate the effect of
macroeconomic policies.

21

Many commentators have recently argued that the Phillips curve is no longer apparent in the data – the
observed correlation between inflation and slack is much weaker than it has been in the past. If the Phillips
curve truly has flattened or disappeared, then the current strength of the UK labour market may be less likely
to translate into a pick-up in domestic inflationary pressures. Given that the Phillips curve is one of the
building blocks of standard macroeconomic models, including those used by the MPC, a breakdown in the
relationship would also call for a reassessment.

20
21

Both in the UK and in other countries. See for example Giles (2017) and the discussion and references in Vlieghe (2018).
See Forbes (2017) for more detail and a picture of one of the MONIAC machines.
9

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

9

My view is that these fears are largely misplaced. I expect that the narrowing in labour market slack we have
seen over the past year will lead to greater inflationary pressures, as in our standard models. To infer
anything about the Phillips curve from the data, one needs to use a model that also takes into account the
effect of monetary policy.

22

The reason is that good monetary policy, by design, should aim to quickly close

any gaps between output and its potential in order to achieve the inflation target. Even with a working Phillips
curve, these actions will blur any positive correlation in the data.

To illustrate why this is so, Charts 5a and 5b plot a Phillips curve relationship in blue, alongside a stylised
description of monetary policy in red. The Phillips curve is a simple positive relationship between inflation
and slack. When output increases relative to its potential (that is, a positive output gap opens), this causes
above-target inflation. Conversely, a negative gap causes below-target inflation.
Chart 5a – Stylised representation of Phillips

Chart 5b – Stylised representation of Phillips

curve and monetary policy with cost-push

curve and monetary policy with policy shocks

shocks

Source: McLeay and Tenreyro (2018).

Source: McLeay and Tenreyro (2018).

But good monetary policy should seek to eliminate any such gaps and simultaneously stabilise inflation.
The exception is when cost-push shocks create a trade-off between stabilising inflation and the output gap.
In the face of large or persistent shocks that create a trade-off between these two goals, the MPC is required
by our remit to strike a balance between the two – for example to reduce output below potential in the face of
above-target inflation. The red line plots an example preferred trade-off, which will depend on the slope of
the Phillips curve and the policymaker’s preferences.

Any time we see data on inflation and the output gap, we will be at the intersection of the red and blue lines.
This means that we cannot interpret the observed data we see as the Phillips curve. If there are large

22

I elaborate on this identification problem in a recent paper, McLeay and Tenreyro (2018).
10

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

10

cost-push shocks, such as changes in energy prices, then the Phillips curve will move around, as shown in
the dashed blue lines in Chart 5a. A naïve econometrician running regressions of inflation on the output gap
would see only the red circles and identify the negative monetary policy trade-off line, rather than the positive
Phillips curve relationship.

Successful monetary policy will make the Phillips curve harder to identify in the data. But in practice,
policymakers cannot always perfectly offset fluctuations in demand. There will be unforeseen shocks that
cause output and inflation to evolve differently to their forecasts. These will appear as if they are shifts in the
preferred trade-off (Chart 5b). If these shifts are large relative to the cost-push shocks in Chart 5a, we may
be able to observe the Phillips curve. But as policymakers, even though the Phillips curve underlies our
models, we should always be doing our best to make it disappear in the data.

This example highlights that it may not be possible to see the true relationships from looking at the data
alone. We often need to use a model in such situations. Models can show us a broader picture and help us
consider alternative mechanisms that may be driving the data. (Another option, for the econometricians in
the room, is to come up with clever instruments, but they are not always available.)

Current challenges

So far I have discussed some of the benefits of using macroeconomic models, as well some of the debates
of the past that many economists thought had been settled. But compared to mapmaking, economic
modelling is still a very imprecise science. And probably it will always be, as our economies and our
understanding of them continue to evolve. (So too do our technical modelling capabilities.)

As a result of all this, there will always be ample scope for improvement. I would like to pick out three areas
where some of our standard models have been accused, with some justification, of being somewhat lacking:
first, incorporating banks and the financial sector; second, realistically modelling people’s expectations of the
future; and third, taking into account the ways in which the distribution of different households and firms in
the economy may matter.

23

But I should also emphasise that I think there has been impressive progress on

all three fronts. This list is also not exhaustive – I will briefly mention other areas where models could be
improved.

a) The financial sector

As in the 1970s, the biggest challenge to macroeconomic models has come from a real-world event: the
2008 financial crisis. Economists were charged with having ignored the financial sector in their models;

23

Others have picked out similar sets of challenges, for example, Yellen (2016), as well as Vines and Wills (2018) in the overview
article in the Oxford Review of Economic Policy special issue.
11

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

11

some blamed policymakers for not acting against growing financial imbalances; and above all, economists
were criticised for not predicting the crisis.

While the charge that macroeconomic models failed to predict the financial crisis is fair, I think it helps to
understand the reasons for that prediction failure. Models are used for forecasting, but it is by no means their
only (or even their primary) role in macroeconomics. And most forecasting models are designed to predict
the more frequent peaks and troughs we had seen in the economy in most of the post-war period, not rare
events such as crises.

Often the best we can do is to improve our understanding of crises that have happened in the past or in
other countries and try to avoid the same phenomena happening again – and be prepared to react if they do
happen. But even when we were able to identify worrying financial imbalances that might lead to crises, this
would not mean that we would be able to predict their timing with any accuracy.

24

I should emphasise that prior to the crisis, there were also large parts of the economics profession that did
pay close attention to banks and the financial sector. There are entire literatures exploring bank runs and
liquidity risk, moral hazard in banking, market microstructures and other important issues.

25

With hindsight, it seems clear that macroeconomics should have included more of these insights into its
models.

26

This is exactly what has happened since the crisis, with a mountain of new papers that have added

further insights to our understanding of real economy-financial sector interactions. It is easy to argue this
after the fact, however. Models cannot include every aspect of reality, so the model-builder has to decide
which features matter for a given question.

27

I should add that even though many mainstream

macroeconomic models did not feature a financial or banking sector before the crisis, the insights from the
financial economics literature arguably played an important role in the response to the crisis, particularly in
the form of liquidity provision through quantitative easing programs.

b) More realistic expectations
Many macroeconomic models start from simplified – and, as such, unrealistic – assumptions over how
households and businesses’ behaviour depends on what will happen in the future.

These features often lead to some unusual and implausible results. In particular, because expectations of
the future are so important in the models, policies that work by affecting these can be incredibly powerful.
This phenomenon has been dubbed the ‘forward guidance puzzle’. (Here, ‘guidance’ refers to promises
24

And if policymakers successfully prevent crises, then we will never actually see many that would have otherwise occurred.
For a tiny subsample, see Diamond and Dybvig (1983), Kyle (1985) and Dewatripont and Tirole (1995).
26
There were of course exceptions, notably the financial accelerator model of Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999).
27
In fact, some policy models in the 1960s and 1970s had far more detailed financial sector modelling, which was simplified following
financial-sector deregulation in the 1970s and 1980s (Brayton et al, 1997).
25

12

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

12

about future monetary policy, rather than guidance of the type that the MPC has given, which has been
28

intended to clarify our reaction function) . Taken literally, the models suggest implausibly large economic
effects from promises about interest rates many years in the future.

There is ample empirical evidence that these strong assumptions do not hold in real-world data.

29

Anecdotally, my visits to businesses around the country with the Bank’s regional agents lead me to the same
conclusion. When it comes to setting wages, for example, I have heard a number of times that companies
focus on largely skill-specific salary benchmarks, which, in the model jargon, tend to be backward-looking.
This contrasts with the assumption of forward-looking wage-setting behaviour in most models, and could
explain some of the persistence we see in the real-world wage data.

It is not yet clear how large a problem our assumptions on expectations are for many of our models. It seems
obvious to me that assuming fully rational, perfectly informed households and businesses is rather extreme.
But the other extreme – myopic, backward-looking expectations – would also be unrealistic. It was exactly
that assumption that led our older models to perform so poorly in the 1970s, when inflation expectations
rapidly increased in response to accommodative monetary policy.

Encouragingly, lots of work is going into developing models that make more realistic assumptions. One set of
research still assumes everyone is completely rational, but introduces limits to how easily people can collect
and process information. Some models assume that people only update their information infrequently

30

or

31

imperfectly . Others model the consequences of not knowing how others will behave, especially when that
depends on what they expect you to do, which depends on what you expect them to do, and so on.

32

A second strand of models takes its lead from psychology and looks at what happens when people do not
always behave completely rationally. These behavioural models also have the potential to be more realistic:
laboratory experiments consistently reveal systematic departures from rational behaviour.

33

There is a wide range of approaches incorporating some of these insights into macroeconomic models. One
much-followed is to suppose that although people do not know the entire true model of the economy, they
are able to learn about it over time via econometric estimation.

34

Others assume that people overweigh the

35

more recent past when forming expectations about the future , or that people dislike ambiguity – not being

28

See Carney (2018).
See Coibion, Gorodnichenko, Kamdar (2017) for a recent review.
30
Mankiw and Reis (2002)
31
Woodford (2002) and Sims (2003)
32
These models of ‘imperfect common knowledge’ include Angeletos and La’O (2009), Nimark (2008) and Lorenzoni (2009), among
others.
33
See Kahneman and Tversky (1979), for example, or DellaVigna (2009) for a literature review.
34
See Evans and Honkapoja (1999) for an extensive review of these models.
35
Bordalo, Gennaioli and Schleifer (2018)
29

13

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

13

able to work out how likely something is to occur.

36

Finally, some recent modelling assumes that given the

complexity of the economy, people within it build a simplified model in which they pay more attention to some
variables than others.

37

c) Distributional effects

Another unrealistic assumption in many macroeconomic models is that everyone is the same. Or more
accurately, that everyone can be characterised by a single, representative household or firm. While
unrealistic, this has helped ensure that the models remain simple enough to be able to solve (and
understand), while still being based on microfounded individually optimal behaviour. As always, whether this
simplification matters depends on the question we are using the model to address.
If we are interested in the distributional effects of monetary policy, then so-called ‘representative agent’
models will not be very useful.

38

But while it is important to understand these effects, it is not the role of

monetary policymakers to try to target particular segments of the population. The MPC remit is clear that we
must target aggregate CPI inflation, while also taking into account other important macroeconomic variables
39

such as growth and employment. (One could argue that flexible inflation targeting itself embeds
distributional considerations, since high and volatile inflation and unemployment tend to affect the poorest in
society the most.)

Monetary policy should nonetheless pay close attention to distributions, since there is a multitude of ways in
which these might affect aggregate outcomes. There is increasing empirical evidence supporting this
observation.

40

Studies suggest, for example, that following a change in monetary policy, there is a bigger

change in spending by younger age groups and by households with low incomes or with mortgages.
We therefore run the risk of being led astray if our models do not keep track of these distributions.

Let me give a different example, also highly relevant for monetary policy.

Although average weekly earnings (AWE) growth has now been strengthening since the middle of 2017, its
persistent weakness had previously been a worry. Arithmetically, however, mean earnings growth will always
be dominated by the wages of those at the top end of the distribution. It is less clear that this is the most
relevant subset of workers for CPI inflation. When it comes to producing goods and services in the CPI
basket, workers in the bottom half of the pay distribution may by disproportionately important. Their wage
growth would then matter more for CPI inflation. Partly due to post-crisis increases in the minimum wage,
pay for these workers has been growing at rates closer to its pre-crisis average (Chart 6).
36

Ilut and Schneider (2014), Baqaee (2016) and Masolo and Monti (2017).
Gabaix (2014).
38
See Haldane (2018) for a discussion of the distributional effects of monetary policy.
39
As articulated in Carney (2018).
40
See Coibion et al (2012), Gornemann et al (2014), Best et al (2015), Cloyne, Ferreira and Surico (2016) and Wong (2016).
37

14

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

14

Chart 6: Average annual change in the nominal

Chart 7: Median and aggregate wage growth

weekly pay distribution

(to April 2017)
Percentage change
on a year earlier

90 £s

Pre-crisis (1997-2008)

80
70

Crisis (2009-11)

60

Post-crisis (2012-17)

6
5

Median of individual pay
growth rates (%)
Growth of mean AWE
regular pay (%)

4

50
40

3

30

2

20

1

10

0

0
-10
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

Percentile
Source: ONS Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings and Bank
calculations.

Sources: Median pay growth from ONS Annual Survey of
Hours and Earnings and Bank calculations, mean regular pay
from ONS Average Weekly Earnings.
Notes: Median pay growth shows annual growth in April of each
year (ending April 2017). Mean regular pay shows three-month
on twelve-month growth in the three months to May each year
(ending May 2017).

We can also construct alternative summary statistics of the wage growth distribution. Chart 7 shows how the
median of the distribution has evolved over time, similar to the Atlanta Fed wage growth measure often used
in the US. Since the crisis, it has generally held up better than the AWE regular pay data. These
distributional splits of the earnings data give me further confidence that the tight labour market will continue
to feed through into domestic inflationary pressures.

Over the past couple of decades economists have developed a range of models that do take distributions
into account.

41

Most recently, several authors have revisited the monetary policy transmission mechanism by

introducing heterogeneous distributions of households, firms and workers into the common New Keynesian
42

framework. A key result in these models is that monetary policy largely works through its indirect effects on
income and employment, with only relatively small direct spending responses to changes in interest rates.

43

d) Others

There are of course several other areas where models could be improved. One area is international linkages,
both through trade in goods and services, and through trade in financial assets. Another is solution methods.
41

The early work of Bewley (1986), Huggett (1993) and Aiyagari (1994) focused on the study of the role of income and wealth
distributions in the macroeconomy, while Den Haan (1997) and Krusell and Smith (1998) introduce heterogeneity into business cycle
models.
42
Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2017), Ravn and Sterk (2017) and Auclert (2017). See also Sterk and Tenreyro (2016).
43
The Bank’s COMPASS model also contains some differences between households, albeit to a more limited extent than some of the
recent literature. It features two types of household – one that has access to financial markets, and one that is forced to consume only
out of its labour income each quarter.
15

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

15

So far macroeconomists have often focused on simplified, linear versions of their models. With advances in
computing power, it is now possible to explore important non-linear effects. I will leave a full discussion of
these issues for another opportunity.

As in the previous discussion of trade-offs in cartography, in all of these areas, economists will also need to
weigh the gains from more realistic models against the cost of additional complexity and possible opacity.

How do we use models in practice?

While aware of their limitations, I still find model-based analysis extremely useful on the MPC. There will
always be some things missing from each of the models we use in economics, or some seemingly unrealistic
assumptions. But I do not see this as a major problem, for a couple of reasons.
First and foremost, is that the MPC’s forecasts are judgement-based, rather than unthinkingly following some
model output. One would not choose to follow a map if the terrain appeared different in reality: the dotted
lines of a mountain footpath on an Ordnance Survey map could become a dangerous hazard following heavy
snowfall. The same applies to our use of models. The model is best thought of as an advisor, used as an
input into our decisions, rather than the author of our forecasts. And this has always been the case on the
MPC.

Second, even though we do use models to inform our projections, we do not focus exclusively on any one
theoretical model. Different committee members will always place different weight on different models and
data sources when coming to a policy decision. Speaking for myself, I value seeing results from several
different types of models when analysing the data and constructing our forecasts.

There are things missing from all models, so we are always likely to need to use a range of models to
answer different questions. For example, since our main macroeconomic model, COMPASS, focuses on the
behaviour of firms and households but does not explicitly model the financial sector, it is useful to look at
results from alternative empirical models when assessing changes in credit market conditions.

44

Or when

forecasting the very near-term outlook, I would typically place more weight on statistical ‘nowcast’ estimates
than some of our more theory-driven models.

45

A recent example of this point was our expectation for Q1 GDP, following the heavy snowfall in February and
March. Ahead of the data release, our DSGE models would have had no way of anticipating that the snow
might affect activity. But unlike the models, since we were aware of the possible impact, as we mentioned in
our March minutes, we revised down our forecast of headline Q1 GDP growth to 0.3%, based on staff
analysis using Google search data.
44
45

Cloyne et al (2015)
Anesti et al (2017)
16

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

16

As we now know, GDP growth came in even weaker than this at 0.1%. There are good reasons to think that
some of this news was also snow-related: the output split of GDP showed relatively weak readings for
sectors likely to be affected (construction and some parts of private non-distribution services – Chart 8). It is
also likely that the Q1 figure will be revised up in later data vintages.

Nonetheless, I do still take some signal from the weak outturn, especially when combined with some
negative news elsewhere, such as a soft picture for the housing market. Unusually, we should get a much
clearer picture of underlying growth momentum over a relatively short timeframe.

Chart 8: Output contributions to quarterly GDP growth
1

Percentage change on previous quarter

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
-0.4

Private non-distribution services
Manufacturing
Other
16 Q3

16 Q4

17 Q1

Distribution
Construction
17 Q2

17 Q3

17 Q4

18 Q1

Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.

Some comments on the UK macro outlook

I hope I have conveyed how and why macroeconomic models do have some use in interpreting the
economic data. Let me now bring together some of the real-world examples to summarise my current view of
the economic outlook.

World GDP has been growing strongly for some time. But in the near-term, there have been some signs of a
slight slowing in momentum. GDP came out weaker-than-expected in both the US and euro area in Q1, and
there has been a modest but relatively broad-based softening in global PMI indicators. Overall, however, the
data remain consistent with the robust global growth incorporated in the MPC’s May IR forecast. We will
need to remain watchful on this front, especially given recent increases in political uncertainty in Europe
(and the associated market reaction), which is another factor that does not directly enter our models.

The data flow on UK activity and inflation has also been slightly weaker than we expected in February. As I
have discussed, I think that much of the downside Q1 GDP news is likely to be erratic, but it does increase
17

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

17

the possibility of some underlying weakness in demand. The negative news on inflation, meanwhile, may
partly relate to a lower contribution from imported inflation. It now looks likely that the effect of exchange-rate
pass through on CPI inflation will fade slightly more quickly than we had expected.

Set against that, the labour market has continued to tighten. I am unconvinced by reports of the death of the
Phillips curve, so I expect this to translate into a pickup in domestic cost pressures. Indeed, annual privatesector regular pay growth reached 3% in March, while evidence from the distribution of wage growth also
signals greater strength.

With falling imported inflation offset by a gradual pick-up in domestic costs, I judge that conditional on the
outlook I have just described, a gradual tightening in monetary policy will be necessary over the next three
years to return inflation to target and keep demand growing broadly in line with supply.

While I anticipate that a few rate rises will be needed, the timing of those rate rises is an open question. To
show why, I will use some stylised optimal policy simulations, since model analysis of this sort is often a
useful input into my policy view. Because the point I want to make relates to the future path of interest rates, I
use a simplified, behavioural version of the COMPASS model, in which expectations have a less powerful
role.

46

Chart 9a: Policy scenario - inflation outturns

Chart 9b: Policy scenario – Bank Rate

2.4

Percentage points change
Baseline scenario
2.5
Optimal policy
Optimal policy (after 1 quarter wait)
2.0
Optimal policy (after 4 quarter wait)

2.3

1.5

2.2

1.0

Per cent
2.6
2.5

2.1

0.5

2.0
1.9
1.8
-1

Baseline scenario
Optimal policy
Optimal policy (after 1 quarter wait)
Optimal policy (after 4 quarter wait)
0
1
2
3

0.0
-0.5
-1

0

Years
Source: Bank calculations.

1

2

3

Years
Source: Bank calculations.

The stylised optimal policy simulations are shown in Charts 9a and 9b. The black dashed lines show a
baseline scenario where, conditional on an upward sloping path for Bank Rate, inflation is above target and
expected to remain so for the following three years. For simplicity, the output gap (not shown) is closed
throughout. The policymaker seeks to minimise deviations of inflation from target, with some weight on
46

Specifically, this simplified version of COMPASS includes bounded rationality on the part of households, constructed using a similar
approach to Gabaix (2014).
18

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

18

output and interest rate volatility.

47

The dark pink lines show the optimal policy in this scenario, which

involves raising Bank Rate once immediately, then several more times over the following three years,
successfully bringing inflation back to target by year two. The other lines instead show scenarios where the
policymaker first decides to wait one quarter (green-blue line) or four quarters (orange line) before changing
Bank Rate, after which they implement the new optimal policy. After waiting one quarter, the policymaker
optimally raises Bank Rate slightly faster and further than they otherwise would have, but the inflation
outcomes are almost identical. After waiting four quarters, the policymaker needs to raise Bank Rate
somewhat more quickly, and ends up with inflation slightly above target until the middle of year three.

The point I would like to emphasise from these simulations is that it may be possible to achieve very similar
outcomes for inflation with somewhat different paths for Bank Rate.

48

This is possible because to some

extent, future changes in policy can act as substitutes for immediate changes.

49

This is especially the case

when the optimal path is relatively flat, since this means that it is easier for policy to achieve the same effect
with a path of rate rises later that is still gradual. The flexibility is limited, however – waiting a few more
quarters increases the likelihood that inflation overshoots the target.

In May, I felt that as in these scenarios, the costs of waiting a short period of time for more information were
small. And because unusually, we are likely to get a significantly clearer picture of the underlying strength of
domestic demand quite soon, there were benefits to leaving policy unchanged. That information, filtered
through some of our models, will be crucial in determining exactly when, in my view, the next rate rise should
occur.

To conclude
I would like to finish by quoting Alfred Korzybski (1933). “A map is not the territory it represents, but, if
correct, it has a similar structure to the territory, which accounts for its usefulness”. I do not wish to
overstretch the map analogy – economics will always be less accurate and less predictable than
cartography. But we should keep working on our models because they do help our thinking – even though
they will never predict everything in advance – we might know better how to respond to events once they
occur.

47

Optimal policy is computed by minimising, under commitment, a quadratic loss function including inflation deviations (with a weight of
1), the output gap (with weight of 0.15) and the change in the interest rate (weight of 2.5). Given the reduced role for expectations in the
model, the distinction between optimal commitment and discretionary policies is smaller than would be the case in a model with fully
rational expectations.
48
Broadbent (2015) makes a similar point.
49
This is despite the simulations being produced in a model that does not feature a powerful expectations channel.
19

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

19

References
Aiygari, S. R. (1994), “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Volume 109, Issue 3, pp. 659-684.
Anesti, N., Hayes, S., Moreira, A. and Tasker J. (2017), “Peering into the present: the Bank’s approach to
GDP nowcasting,” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin 2017 Q2.
Angeletos, G.M. and La’O, J. (2009), “Incomplete information, higher-order beliefs and price inertia,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, Volume 56, Supplement, pp. S19-S37.
Auclert, A. (2017), “Monetary Policy and the Redistribution Channel,” NBER Working paper No. 23451.
Baqaee, D.R. (2016), “Asymmetric Inflation Expectations, Downward Rigidity of Wages and Asymmetric
Business Cycles," Discussion paper.
Bernanke, B., Gertler, M. and Gilchrist, S. (1999), “The financial accelerator in a quantitative business
cycle framework,” Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 1, Part C, pp. 1341-1393.
Best, M., Cloyne, J., Ilzetzki, E. and Kleven, H. (2015), “Interest Rates, Debt and Intertemporal Allocation:
Evidence from Notched Mortgage Contracts in the United Kingdom,” Bank of England Working Paper No.
543.
Bewley, T. (1986), “Stationary Monetary Equilibrium with a Continuum of Independently Fluctuating
Consumers," in Contributions to Mathematical Economics in Honor of Gerard Debreu, ed. by W.
Hildenbrand, and A. Mas-Collel. North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Blanchard, O. (2000), “What Do We Know about Macroeconomics that Fisher and Wicksell did not?”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Volume 115, No. 4, pp. 1375-1409.
Bordalo, P., Gennaioli, N. and Shleifer, A. (2018), “Diagnostic Expectations and Credit Cycles,” Journal of
Finance, Volume 73, Issue 1, pp. 199-227.
Brayton, F.and Mauskopf, E. (1987), “Structure and uses of the MPS Quarterly Econometric Model of the
United States,” Federal Reserve Bulletin 73, pp. 93-109.
Brayton, F., Levin, A., Lyon, R. and Williams, J.C. (1997), “The evolution of macro models at the Federal
Reserve Board,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Volume 47, pp. 43-81.
Broadbent, B. (2015), “The MPC’s forecasts and the yield curve: predictions versus promises,” speech
given at Reuters, Canary Wharf.
Burgess, S., Fernandez-Corugedo, E., Groth, C., Harrison, R., Monti, F., Theodoridis, K., and Waldron,
M. (2013), “The Bank of England’s forecasting platform: COMPASS, MAPS, EASE and the suite of models,”
Bank of England Working Paper no. 471.
Carney, M. (2016), “The Spectre of Monetarism,” speech given at Roscoe Lecture, Liverpool John Moores
University.
Carney, M. (2017), “Lambda,” speech given at the London School of Economics.
Carney, M. (2018), “Guidance, Contingencies and Brexit,” speech given at the Society of Professional
Economists.
Carroll, L. (1893), Sylvie and Bruno Concluded, London, Macmillan.
Clark, T. and Giles, C. (2018), “Has economics failed?” Financial Times, available at
https://www.ft.com/content/670607fc-43c5-11e8-97ce-ea0c2bf34a0b.
20

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

20

Christiano, L., Eichenbaum, M. and Evans, C. (1996), "The Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks: Evidence
from the Flow of Funds," Review of Economics and Statistics, Volume 78, No. 1, pp. 16-34.
Christiano L., Eichenbaum M. and Evans C. (1999), “Monetary Policy Shocks: What Have We Learned
and To What End?” in Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 1A, edited by John B. Taylor and Michael
Woodford. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Christiano, L., Eichenbaum, M. and Evans, C. (2005), “Nominal Rigidities and the Dynamics Effects of a
Shock to Monetary Policy," Journal of Political Economy, Volume 113, No. 1, pp 1-45.
Christiano, L., Eichenbaum, M. and Trabandt, M. (2018), “On DSGE Models,” working paper
Cloyne, J. and Hürtgen, P. (2016), “The Macroeconomic Effects of Monetary Policy: A New Measure for the
United Kingdom,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Volume 8, No. 4, pp. 75-102.
Cloyne, J., Ferreira, C. and Surico, P. (2016), “Monetary Policy When Households Have Debt: New
Evidence of the Transmission Mechanism,” CEPR Discussion Paper 11023.
Cloyne, J., Thomas, R., Tuckett, A. and Wills, S. (2015), “A Sectoral Framework for Analyzing Money,
Credit and Unconventional Monetary Policy,” Bank of England Working Paper No. 556.
Coibion, O., Gorodnichenko, Y. and Kamdar R. (2017), “The Formation of Expectations, Inflation and the
Phillips Curve,” NBER Working Paper No. 23304.
Coibion, O., Gorodnichenko, Y., Kueng, L. and Silvia, J. (2012), “Innocent Bystanders? Monetary Policy
and Inequality in the U.S.” NBER Working Paper No. 18170.
DellaVigna, S. (2009), “Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field,” Journal of Economic
Literature, Volume 47, Issue 2, pp. 315-372.
Den Haan, W. (1997), “Solving Dynamic Models with Aggregate Shocks and Heterogeneous Agents,”
Macroeconomic Dynamics, Volume 1, Issue 2, pp. 355-386.
Dewatripoint, M. and Tirole, J. (1995), The Prudential Regulation of Banks, MIT Press, Cambridge.
Diamond, D. and Dybvig, P.H. (1983), “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance and Liquidity,” Journal of Political
Economy, Volume 91, No. 3, pp. 401-419.
Ellis, C., Mumtaz, H. and Zabczyk, P. (2014), “What Lies Beneath? A Time-varying FAVAR Model for the
UK Transmission Mechanism,” Economic Journal, Volume 124, Issue 576, pp. 668-699.
Eichengreen, B. (1999), “The Keynesian Revolution and the Nominal Revolution: Was There a Paradigm
Shift in Economic Policy in the 1930s?” Storia dell-economia mondiale (A History of the World Economy),
Volume 4: Between Expansion and Recession (1850-1930) (2000).
Evans, G.W. and Honkapoja S. (1999) – “Learning Dynamics,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 1,
Part A, pp. 449-542.
Farmer, R. (2013), “The Natural Rate Hypothesis: an idea past its sell-by date,” Bank of England Quarterly
Bulletin 2013 Q3.
Forbes, K. (2017), “A MONIAC (not maniac) economy,” speech given during a regional visit to Leeds.
Fromm, G. and Klein, L. (1965). “The Brookings-S.S.R.C. Quarterly Econometric Model of the United
States: Model Properties.” American Economic Review, Volume 55, No 1/2, pp 348-361.

21

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

21

Gabaix, X. (2014), “A Sparsity-Based Model of Bounded Rationality,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
Volume 129, Issue 4, pp. 1661-1710.
Giles, C. (2017), “Central bankers face a crisis of confidence as models fail,” Financial Times, available at
https://www.ft.com/content/333b3406-acd5-11e7-beba-5521c713abf4.
Gornemann, N., Kuester, K. and Nakajima, M. (2014), “Doves for the Rich, Hawks for the Poor?
Distributional Consequences of Monetary Policy,” Discussion paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
Haldane, A. (2017), “A Little More Conversation A Little Less Action,” speech given at the Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco.
Haldane, A. (2018), “How Monetary Policy Affects Your GDP,” speech given at the Finch Lecture, University
of Melbourne.
Haldane, A. (2018), “Will big data keep its promise?” speech given at the Data Analytics for Finance and
Macro Research Centre, King’s College Business School.
Harrison R., Nikolov K., Quinn M., Ramsay G., Scott, A. and Thomas, R. (2005), “The Bank of England
Quarterly Model,” Bank of England.
Hicks, J. R. (1937), "Mr. Keynes and the Classics: A Suggested Interpretation," Econometrica, Volume 5,
No. 2, pp. 147-59.
Huggett, M. (1993), “The risk-free rate in heterogeneous-agent-incomplete-insurance economies,” Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control, Volume 17, Issue 5-6, pp. 953-969.
Ilut, C.L. and Schneider, M. (2014), “Ambiguous Business Cycles,” American Economic Review, Volume
104, No. 8, pp. 2368-2399.
Kahneman, D. and Tversky A. (1979), “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk,”
Econometrica, Volume 47, No. 2, pp/ 263-292.
Kaplan, G., Moll, B. and Violante G. (2018), “Monetary Policy According to HANK,” American Economic
Review, Volume 108, No. 3 pp. 697-743.
Keyens, J.M. (1936), The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, New York: Harcourt, Brace &
World.
Korinek, A. (2017), “Thoughts on DSGE Macroeconomics: Matching the Moment, But Missing the Point?”
Working paper.
Korzybski, A. (1933), Science and Sanity: An Introduction to Non-Aristotelian Systems and General
Semantics, The International Non-Aristotelian Library Pub. Co.
Krugman, P. (2006), “Introduction to the ‘General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money’” Palgrave
Macmillan.
Krugman, P. (2011), “Mr. Keynes and the Moderns,” speech prepared for the Cambridge conference
commemorating the 75th anniversary of the publication of The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and
Money.
Krusell, P. and Smith, A. (1998), “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the Macroeconomy,” Journal of
Political Economy, Volume 106, No. 5, pp. 867-896.
Kydland, F. and Prescott, E. (1982), “Time to build and aggregate fluctuations,” Econometrica Volume 50,
No. 6, pp. 1345-1370.

22

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

22

Kyle, A.S. (1985), “Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading,” Econometrica, Vol. 53, No. 6, pp. 1315-1335.
Lorenzoni, G. (2009), "A Theory of Demand Shocks," American Economic Review, Volume 99, No. 5, pp.
2050-84.
Lucas, R. (1976), “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy 1, 19-46.
Mankiw, G. and Reis, R. (2002), “Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices: A Proposal to Replace the New
Keynesian Phillips Curve,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Volume 117, Issue 4, pp. 1295-1328.
Masolo, R. and Monti F. (2017), “Ambiguity, Monetary Policy and Trend Inflation,” Centre for
Macroeconomics Woking Paper.
McLeay, M. and Tenreyro, S. (2018), “Optimal Inflation and the Identification of the Phillips Curve,”
Discussion paper.
Nimark, K. (2008), “Dynamic pricing and imperfect common knowledge,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
Issue 2, pp. 365-382.
Olivei, G. and Tenreyro, S. (2007), “The Timing of Monetary Policy Shocks,” American Economic Review,
Volume 97, pp. 636-663.
Olivei, G. and Tenreyro, S. (2010), “Wage-Setting Patterns and Monetary Policy: International Evidence,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, Volume 57, Issue 7, pp. 785-802.
Pagan, A. (2003), “Report on modelling and forecasting at the Bank of England,” Quarterly Bulletin, Volume
43, No. 1, pp. 60-89.
Patterson, K.D., Harnett, I.R., Robinson, G.N. and Ryding, J. (1987), “The Bank of England Quarterly
Model of the UK Economy”, Economic Modelling, Volume 4, pp. 398-629.
Ravn, M. and Sterk, V. (2017), “Job uncertainty and deep recessions,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
Volume 90, pp. 125-141.
Robinson, J. (1962), Essays in the Theory of Economic Growth, Palgrave Macmillan.
Romer, C. and Romer, D. (2004), “A New Measure of Monetary Shocks: Derivation and Implications,”
American Economic Review, Volume 94, No. 4, pp. 1055-1084.
Romer, P. (2016), “The trouble with macroeconomics,” The American Economist, forthcoming
Shafik, M. (2017a), “In experts we trust?” speech given at the Oxford Union.
Shafik, M. (2017b), “Experts must fight back,” Times Higher Education.
Sims, C. (2003), “Implications of rational inattention,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Volume 50, Issue 3,
pp. 665-690.
Smets, F. and Wouters, R. (2007), “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian DSGE
Approach,” American Economic Review, Volume 97, No. 3, pp. 586-606.
Sterk, V. and Tenreyro, S. (2016), “The Transmission of Monetary Policy through Redistribution and
Durable Purchases,” Discussion paper.
Tenreyro, S. and Thwaites, G. (2016), “Pushing on a String: US Monetary Policy is Less Powerful in
Recessions,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Volume 8, Number 4, pp. 43-74.

23

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

23

Vines, D. and Wills, S. (2018), “The rebuilding macroeconomic theory project: an analytical assessment,”
Oxford Review of Economic Policy, Volume 34, Issue 1-2, 5 January 2018, Pages 1-42.
Vlieghe, G. (2017), “Good policy vs accurate forecasts,” speech given at the Bloomberg Headquarters,
London.
Vlieghe, G. (2018), “From asymmetry to symmetry: changing risks to the economic outlook,” speech given at
the Confederation of British Industry, Birmingham.
Weale, M. (2016), “Brexit and Monetary Policy,” speech given at the Resolution Foundation.
Wong, A. (2016), “Population Aging and the Transmission of Monetary Policy to Consumption,” Working
Paper, Northwestern University.
Woodford, M. (1999), “Revolution and Evolution in Twentieth-Century Macroeconomics,” Frontiers of the
Mind in the Twenty-First Century, U.S. Library of Congress, Washington D.C..
Woodford, M. (2001), “Imperfect Common Knowledge and the Effects of Monetary Policy,” NBER Working
Paper No. 8673.
Yellen, J. (2016), “Macroeconomic Research After the Crisis,” speech given at the "The Elusive 'Great'
Recovery: Causes and Implications for Future Business Cycle Dynamics" 60th annual economic conference
sponsored by the Federal Reserve

24

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

24

