Bank of England

Page 1

Monetary policy in the face
of large shocks − speech by
Silvana Tenreyro
Given at The Resolution Foundation and hosted jointly with the Society
of Professional Economists, London

Bank of England

Page 2

Speech
Good evening. Let me start by thanking the Resolution Foundation and the Society of
Professional Economists for co-hosting this event.
This is my final public speech as an MPC member and I would like to take the opportunity
to thank my current and former colleagues on the MPC and the Bank of England’s staff. It
has been a true privilege to serve on the committee and work with so many talented and
dedicated people, indefatigably committed to public service.
This has not been a quiet six years on the MPC. Two once-in-a-generation shocks of
extreme virulence have hit the economy in a space of less than three years: first the
pandemic, and its various aftershocks; and then the war in Ukraine, and its effect on
energy and other commodity prices. The economy has also faced changes in international
trading relations, most importantly, the UK’s exit from the EU, and between the US and
China. And there have been several episodes of global and domestic financial volatility.
In my speech today, I will attempt to put the scale of these shocks into historical context. I
will then ask what monetary policy can do to maintain credibility when faced with such
large shocks, before touching on lessons for economic forecasting and communications.

1. Once-in-a-generation shocks
Both of the enormous shocks that have affected the economy – the pandemic and the war
– have been global in nature. The pandemic affected everyone, while the economic effects
of the Ukraine war have also been widely felt, given the importance of energy and
commodities to economic activity.
Despite being global shocks, their effects have differed markedly across countries. Chart 1
shows the path for household consumption compared to its pre-pandemic trend in each of
the UK, the US, and the euro area. In the US, consumption quickly recovered to around its
pre-pandemic trend, whereas in the UK it remains some 9 percentage points below, with
the euro area somewhere in between.
In Tenreyro (2021a) I highlighted how one of the key drivers of these differences was the
different fiscal response across jurisdictions. In the UK and the euro area, fiscal policy
largely aimed at preserving jobs and maintaining incomes. In the US, fiscal policy was a
more widespread demand stimulus, increasing aggregate household income well above its
pre-Covid trend. This large US demand stimulus, combined with rolling supply disruptions
related to the pandemic, was also the driver for much of the rapid global increase in
goods-price inflation from 2021, as I discussed in Tenreyro (2021b).

Bank of England

Page 3

Chart 1: Real household consumption

Notes: Indexed to 2019 Q4=100.
Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Eurostat, Office for National Statistics and Bank calculations.

The other major cause of different outcomes was differences in the scale of the energy
shock across regions. Chart 2 (left panel) shows that the increase in retail energy prices
was far larger in the euro area and the UK – both net energy importers – than in the US,
which was largely unaffected by the increase in European gas prices stemming from the
war in Ukraine. This led to a larger reduction in real incomes in the UK and euro area,
contributing to weaker consumption.
Differences in the size, as well as in the timing of the energy shock are also a primary
reason for different inflation dynamics across regions (Chart 2, right panel). In the US, the
cumulative increase in retail energy prices from the end of 2019 (implied by the inflation
rates in Chart 2) peaked at less than 30%. In the euro area, it reached 80% at peak,
though started to reverse quickly soon afterwards. In the UK, the figure was over 110%.
And given the lagged nature of the Ofgem pricing mechanism in the UK, it only started
reversing very recently – in April 2023.

Bank of England

Page 4

Chart 2: Retail energy prices and inflation
Electricity, gas & other fuels inflation
100

Headline inflation
100

Per cent

UK

80
60

12

12
Per cent

80

10

60

8

UK
10
8

EA
40

40

EA

6

6
US

20

20

4

4

0

2

2

-20

0
Jan 21

US
0
-20
Jan 21 Jul 21 Jan 22 Jul 22 Jan 23

0
Jul 21

Jan 22

Jul 22

Jan 23

Notes: CPI inflation for the UK and euro area; PCE inflation for the US.
Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Eurostat, Office for National Statistics and Bank calculations.

Any assessment of cross-country inflation dynamics also needs to account for the relative
impact of energy prices on measures of core or domestic inflation. Energy is directly or
indirectly an input to all sectors, even in the services sector, as recently quantified in
Dhingra and Page (2023).1 So while measures of core inflation or even core services
inflation can be useful proxies for domestically generated inflation in some circumstances
(see Tenreyro, 2019a), they have also been heavily influenced by the energy-price shock.
Moreover, given some explicit or implicit wage indexation in the UK depends on measured
rates of headline CPI or RPI inflation, there is likely to have been at least some impact on
wage growth, irrespective of the tightness or otherwise of the labour market.2
These two large shocks have also been the source of the cost-of-living crisis. Higher
energy prices reduced the real income of the UK, which is not something that monetary
policy can offset. Even if we had known about the shocks in advance, then the best that
monetary policy can do is choose, within the remit, whether the shock affects the economy
through temporarily higher inflation, or instead through higher unemployment and lower
nominal income growth. In either case, real incomes necessarily fall. Later in the speech, I
examine whether, if the MPC could somehow have known about the war in Ukraine (and
the energy shock) in advance, it could have achieved a better balance of inflation and
unemployment, given its remit.
The MPC’s remit also recognises that inflation will depart from target as a result of shocks.
The remit is clear that while the MPC should always be aiming to bring inflation back to
target, inflation should not always be at 2%. Indeed, in the face of large shocks, the remit

1

See also Dhingra (2023).
In Tenreyro (2022) I discussed the role that a tight labour market played in determining the strength of
second-round effects from the increase in energy prices.
2

Bank of England

Page 5

explicitly states that the MPC should consider the speed with which it aims to bring
inflation back to target, in order to avoid variability in output.
As well as comparing across regions, we can also compare the inflation increases with
those in response to previous energy-price increases. The recent energy price increase
has been larger than other episodes in the past 50 years, including those that hit the
economy in the 1970s. Despite the larger shock, the rate of CPI inflation last year was well
below the peaks UK inflation measures reached in the 1970s and early 1980s (Chart 3).

Chart 3: UK headline inflation during energy price increases
Per cent

30

30

25

25
Aug 1975

20

20

15

15

10

10
May 1980

Oct 2022

5

5

Sep 2011

0
-24

-16

-8

0

0
8

16

24

32

Months from peak

Notes: Dates refer to month of peak in inflation. Headline inflation measured as RPI inflation in 1975 and
1980; CPI inflation in 2011 and 2022.
Sources: Office for National Statistics and Bank calculations.

The lower peak in inflation in part reflects a better starting point: the 1970s energy shocks
came after many years of steadily rising inflation. It could also signal a policy framework
with greater credibility than in the past. But given the scale of the shocks we have seen,
how should policymakers go about retaining credibility, and ensuring inflation does come
back to target at an appropriate horizon?

2. Monetary policy credibility
For modern central bankers, credibility is sacrosanct. Not long after the Bank of England’s
independence, the economist and central banker Alan Blinder, 2000 surveyed 84 central
bank leaders, and the vast majority said credibility was ‘of the upmost importance’.3 If they
had been given the option, some may have said it was even more important than that.

3

70 out of 84, with the other 14 saying it was ‘quite important’.

Bank of England

Page 6

This is because for inflation-targeting central banks, credibility is a fundamental asset.
Credibility means that the central bank is trusted to do what it says it will do. In this case,
trust that it will fulfil its inflation-targeting remit. Without that trust, individuals and
businesses may come to expect inflation persistently above (or below) target, and arrange
contracts that push their own prices and wages higher (or lower) in response. These
expectations of inflation away from target risk turning into a self-fulfilling prophecy.
Ultimately, medium-term inflation is always within monetary policymakers’ control. But
greater credibility can make the inflation target less costly to achieve. With expectations
anchored by a credible inflation-targeting framework, inflation is less volatile in response to
shocks.4 And following large inflationary shocks, such as those we have seen over the
past few years, a smaller reduction in activity is needed to bring inflation back to target.5
If credibility is so important, how do we obtain it? And once we have it, how do we keep it?
In the views of those 84 central bankers, some of the most important factors were an
independent and transparent central bank, a history of fighting inflation and above all, a
history of honesty: fulfilling promises and remits. The UK’s monetary framework meets all
of these criteria, with an independent Bank of England, and a Monetary Policy Committee
accountable for a quantitative inflation-targeting remit given to it by government.
Monetary policy credibility in the UK therefore derives from the framework and the MPC’s
history of fulfilling its remit. But this description seems at odds with how many
commentators discuss the concept. There are often suggestions that an interest rate
decision at a particular meeting, or hawkish communications that sound tough on inflation
are needed, to ensure or win back credibility.6 Similarly, in the wake of the sharp increase
in sterling risk premia after the September 2022 fiscal event, there was much commentary
on the size of interest-rate increase needed to restore credibility, as measured by the
value of sterling.
I do not believe that such shortcuts exist. Monetary credibility cannot be won (or lost) from
one month to the next. We must earn it (and keep it) the hard way, through a long history
of fulfilling the remit, and transparently explaining how we do so. In particular, the MPC
should set policy to meet the inflation target in the medium-term. Sometimes that will
require higher interest rates, and sometimes lower. But I do not see any trade-off between
meeting the inflation target and ensuring credibility.

Restoring credibility after the 1970s
To illustrate the process, the natural case study economists turn to is the experience of
regaining credibility in the 1980s. Starting in 1973, inflation in the US was above 5%
See e.g. Erceg and Levin (2003), ‘Imperfect credibility and inflation persistence.’
See e.g. Ball (1995), ‘Disinflation with imperfect credibility’.
6 See e.g. ‘The Bank of England’s credibility is still on the line’. in the Financial Times (22 June 2023).
4
5

Bank of England

Page 7

almost continuously for nearly a decade, with a third of that period above 10%. In the UK
the situation was even more difficult, with RPI inflation above 5% for almost 13 years, and
in double digits for over half of this period. Inflation expectations soared, and by almost
any metric, monetary policy had very little credibility.
The restoration of credibility has been studied particularly extensively in the US, where
there was arguably a decisive victory over inflation at an earlier point.7 (In the UK a
longer-lasting improvement came after the adoption of inflation targeting in 1992.) In the
US, under Federal Reserve Chair Paul Volcker, monetary policy was tightened sharply.
This generated a recession, reduced inflation, and reduced longer-term interest rates
(Volcker’s preferred metric of policy credibility).8
The lesson from this period is not, however, that tight monetary policy or an interest-rate
decision on a given month can restore or maintain credibility, in and of itself. Rather,
Volcker restored monetary policy credibility and lowered inflation expectations by first
reducing the rate of inflation. The chain of events is clear from the time pattern of the data,
with a recession starting in 1981, followed by a fall in inflation in 1982. Finally, there was a
reduction in longer-term interest rates, as the disinflation slowly helped build credibility,
with a new history of relatively low inflation and a central banker fulfilling their promise.9
Even though it is itself an outcome of the framework and the history of its success in
controlling inflation, credibility, or a lack of it, can also clearly affect that success. It is an
input into the inflation outlook as well as an output of inflation control. As such, it is
important to be able to measure it and its effect on inflation.

Anchored inflation expectations
In the theoretical wisdom I have sketched, and in central banking circles, credibility is
typically seen as synonymous with anchored inflation expectations. So much so, that
metrics of long-term inflation expectations derived from financial markets are often used as
a measure of central bank credibility.
Financial-market measures have the advantage that they are derived from contracts that
involve market participants putting significant sums of money on the line. Participants have
every incentive to be well informed about the inflation outlook, which should be reflected in
accurate expectations. Longer-term expectations, as proxied by the 2-year or 5-year

‘According to Goodfriend and King (2005), ‘The incredible Volcker disinflation’ was ‘arguably the most
widely discussed and visible macroeconomic event of the last 50 years of U.S. history’.
8 See Goodfriend and King (2005), ‘The incredible Volcker disinflation’, and the FOMC transcripts quoted
therein.
9 The debate in general is a quantitative one: how much demand needs to slow down to compress price
growth.
7

Bank of England

Page 8

inflation swap rate, 5-years forward, can tell us what financial markets think will happen at
a point when shocks have subsided, potentially giving a clearer read on anchoring.10
These measures, shown in Chart 4, also have some major disadvantages, however. At a
practical level, they are measures of inflation compensation – not expectations. In the UK
they reference RPI rather than CPI, with the wedge between the two inflation rates varying
over time. The instruments can also be illiquid, and are heavily used for hedging pension
liabilities. Both of these factors can lead to movements in compensation unrelated to
expectations or risks of future CPI inflation.11 Inflation compensation also includes risk
premia, owing to future inflation risks. While inflation risks can be indicative of future policy
actions (such as a greater willingness to tolerate inflation), they can also just be a
reflection of the distribution of shocks hitting the economy.12

Chart 4: Financial-market measures of inflation compensation

Notes: Data to 27 June. 5y1y, 5y2y and 5y5y denote, respectively the one, two and five year swap rates, five
years ahead.
Source: Bloomberg Finance L.P.

More fundamentally, as I set out in Tenreyro (2019b), if we care about inflation
expectations because they can feed back into inflation itself, it is far from clear that
financial-market inflation expectations are the ones that matter. In the simple textbook
models at the heart of monetary economists’ intuition, there is one set of inflation
expectations, which also accurately predict future inflation in the absence of shocks. In

10

UK RPI is due to be aligned with CPIH from February 2030. Expectations of this change will now be
affecting the five year swap rate, five years forward, but not yet the one or two year swap rates, which
therefore provide a clearer read on recent movements.
11 As discussed in Vlieghe (2021), for example.
12 There are models that estimate the CPI expectation components of financial market inflation
compensation measures, but these are naturally imperfect for instance given risk premia are unobservable.

Bank of England

Page 9

these models, controlling inflation expectations is sufficient to control inflation. In reality,
expectations may differ across different households, firms, financial market participants
and policymakers. To work out the appropriate policy response, we need to ask which
expectations have changed. How will those changes influence actual inflation dynamics?
And how can policy best offset any changes in a way that meets the MPC’s remit?
On their own, changes in financial market inflation expectations are not likely to lead to
self-fulfilling inflationary dynamics. Market participants have no role in firms’ price-setting
decisions, nor in their wage negotiations with workers. This is why the literature has moved
to understanding inflation expectations of both firms and households (as more relevant for
pricing decisions and wage negotiations). In a new paper (Bandera, Barnes, Chavaz,
Tenreyro and von dem Berge, 2023) with Bank of England co-authors, we summarise
the literature on the factors shaping inflation expectations, and in particular the role of
monetary policy, and the effect of inflation expectations on inflation and activity. We
conclude that despite their prominent role in economic models and policy debates, the
understanding of the formation and economic impact of expectations in the literature
remains limited. But we do draw some tentative conclusions, which I think have important
implications for policy.
On the effect of monetary policy on household and firm expectations, empirically: identified
monetary policy shocks have significant effects on inflation, but more limited (if any) direct
effects on inflation expectations. There is even evidence that the effect on expectations
often goes in the ‘wrong’ direction.13 Instead, although household and firm inflation
expectations tend to follow actual inflation, they are also often highly sensitive in the short
run to volatile but salient components of the basket, such as the prices of energy and food,
which are largely outside the control of monetary policy.
There is also mixed evidence on the impact of household and firm inflation expectations on
activity and inflation. It is important to differentiate according to the type of shock: in
response to a supply shock that increases household inflation expectations, spending
tends to fall, rather than rise. For firms, developments in their own sector appear to be
more important than aggregate inflation expectations. It is possible that the weakness of
these channels in the UK stems in part from a recent history of low and stable inflation. 14

See e.g. Andre, Pizzinelli, Roth and Wohlfart (2022), ‘Subjective Models of the Macroeconomy:
Evidence From Experts and Representative Samples’. When asked how higher interest rates will affect
inflation, households and firms more often than not respond that they would increase price or cost inflation.
See also Barrett and Adams (2022), ‘Shocks to Inflation Expectations’ which suggests that households
have a stagflationary view of the world.
14 Werning (2022), ‘Expectations and the Rate of Inflation’, and Beaudry et al. (2022), ‘Looking Through
Supply Shocks versus Controlling Inflation Expectations: Understanding the Central Bank Dilemma’,
offer a different take: future inflation expectations become less relevant in a high inflation environment.
Instead, spot or past inflation, or ‘level-k thinking’ expectations (intra-temporal expectations of what others
might do concurrently) are key.
13

Bank of England

Page 10

The overall policy conclusion I draw from this evidence is that it would be unwise to
attempt to use inflation expectations, or some other metric of perceived credibility, as an
intermediate target of monetary policy. In simple models, there is a close relationship
between expectations and actual future inflation outturns. In reality, the two objects can
diverge – measured expectations will move in response to actual inflation and energy and
food prices. So in the short-term, these expectations are affected by volatile shocks, but
less so by monetary policy. When faced with a situation in which inflation is set to return to
target, but expectations or perceptions of credibility have moved, there is no trade-off for
monetary policy. The route back to full credibility and anchored inflation expectations
involves bringing inflation back to target, responding to changes in expectations only to the
extent they affect the medium-term inflation outlook.
This conclusion has historical echoes. In the UK and in the US, the policy tightening in
response to the 1970s inflation was implemented in part via the adoption of money growth
measures as intermediate targets. These monetary targets were themselves aimed at
restoring policy credibility. But when money growth volatility left policymakers with a choice
between meeting their intermediate targets, and their ultimate objective of controlling
inflation, the money targets were abandoned, as low and stable inflation was deemed the
ultimate path to credibility.

Monetary policy rules
Another commonly proposed way of ensuring credibility and keeping inflation expectations
anchored is by following a monetary policy rule.15 The best known of these rules is a
Taylor rule, which in its most basic form, recommends that for each percentage point
increase (or decrease) in inflation, interest rates should be raised (or cut) by more than
one percentage point in response. In simple models, such a rule is sufficient to always
bring inflation back to target after a shock. As a result, if a policymaker can promise to
follow such a rule at all times, then inflation expectations should remain anchored.
Unfortunately, backward-looking rules or policies such as standard Taylor rules do a
particularly bad job of stabilising inflation when there are lags in the transmission of
monetary policy. I discussed in Tenreyro (2022) how there are many sources of these
lags, with one particularly visible one being the effect of monetary policy on mortgage
rates. With a high proportion of fixed-rate mortgages, the majority of the effect of the large
and rapid policy tightening so far on mortgage rates has not yet occurred, as indeed is the
case for the overall impact of monetary policy on inflation.
In the presence of policy lags, changing policy aggressively in response to past data can
become destabilising, rather than stabilising. This is especially the case in response to
shocks with large transitory components or following a succession of rate changes in one
15

See e.g. Taylor (1992), ‘Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice’.

Bank of England

Page 11

direction, when it can lead to overtightening. By the time additional policy changes have
their largest effects on inflation, either the shock has already reversed, or the cumulative
impact of past policy has already brought inflation back to target. As a result, a
backward-looking policy rule is likely to become highly suboptimal, and inconsistent with
the remit. A policymaker who adopted one would be faced with a similar choice as under
an intermediate policy target: to stick to the rule in the hope of retaining credibility, or to
abandon it and set whatever (discretionary) policy was better able to meet the inflation
target and fulfil the remit, ensuring long-run credibility.
The idea that monetary policy needs to be forward-looking is something that the MPC has
stressed since its inception. In 1997, Mervyn King, then Chief Economist, set out that
‘The guiding principle of monetary policy,’ was ‘to look ahead and act early’. And that the
inflation target did ‘not mean setting policy according to the current rate of inflation’. The
then future Chief Economist, Andy Haldane, had described such a strategy colourfully as
‘the monetary policy dog…chasing one’s tail’. In the terminology of Haldane (1998) and
Svensson (1997), policymakers instead needed to do ‘inflation forecast targeting’. Given
lags between changes in monetary policy and their effects, a forecast becomes essential
in setting appropriate policy.
To sum up, my view is that there are no shortcuts to obtaining credibility, nor, in the face of
very large shocks, to maintaining it. As the MPC has always done, it must interpret all of
the economic data, including different measures of inflation expectations, and judge what
they imply for its inflation forecast. It can then set policy, in line with the remit, to ensure
inflation settles at 2% in the medium term.

3. Forecasting and models
I have discussed so far how policymakers need to fulfil their remits to maintain credibility,
and that given the presence of policy lags, they need to produce forecasts to meet their
inflation targets. An additional risk, then, is that if those forecasts are not accurate enough,
policymakers could mistakenly set policy in a way that led to suboptimal outcomes.
On the topic of forecasting, the Bank’s Court recently commissioned a broad review into
the Bank’s forecasting and related processes during times of significant uncertainty. I
would not try to anticipate what the conclusions of an extensive review might be. But as a
soon-to-be outside observer of the MPC’s forecasts, I will offer some reflections of my
own, which may help inform some of the current external debate.

Forecasting
There are three areas where I have found that the nature of the MPC’s forecast is not
always well understood outside the Bank. First, the role of forecast uncertainty; second,

Bank of England

Page 12

the difference between short-term and medium-term forecasts; and third, that the MPC
only makes conditional forecasts.
First, many discussions of the MPC’s forecasts tend to ignore the ever-present role of
uncertainty. In the mid-1990s, the Bank brought in the innovation of using fan charts, to
highlight that the forecast was a probability distribution. There is uncertainty about the
shocks that will arise, about the structure of the economy, and about how policy affects it.
The modal (or mean) points of the forecast are important for policy decisions, because
they represent the balance of risks. But with the fan chart the MPC is stating that it expects
outturns to come in above them, on a symmetric forecast, 50% of the time. Thus, any
comparison of outturns with forecast needs to compare (over a long period of time) to the
fan chart distributions, not just point estimates such as the mode.
Second, on the type of forecast, the MPC uses different types of analysis, data and
judgements when putting together its short-term forecasts: often for the next six months
or so; and its medium-term forecasts, for one to three years ahead. Forecast misses at
these different horizons would also have quite different implications for my policy votes.
It may not be surprising that these often depend on different factors. Because data are
published with a lag, short-term forecasts are often for things that have already happened,
or will do in the near future. Hence, there tend to be a host of other timelier data, including
from surveys and from the Bank’s Agents, which can give contemporaneous or nearcontemporaneous information about likely data outturns.
When there are errors on short-term forecasts, they often come from data revisions, or
from unpredictable data volatility, which contains little information about the future. As a
result, errors on these short-term forecasts often do not have major implications for the
appropriate stance of policy. Errors can also arise if usual statistical correlations between
leading indicators and the data break down, as has occurred recently between the PPI
output and CPI goods inflation data (Chart 5). Again, such discrepancies are often related
to volatility, and less often to a persistent structural change in the relationships.

Bank of England

Page 13

Chart 5: CPI goods (ex. energy) price inflation and producer price inflation

Notes: The PPI series has been mean and variance adjusted to match the CPI series.
Sources: Office for National Statistics and Bank calculations.

In contrast, the medium-term parts of the forecast depend more on the MPC’s judgements
on macroeconomic factors and behaviour. With fewer reliable leading indicators to go on,
and more time for further shocks to arise, this horizon is more uncertain. But given the lags
in policy transmission, it is the medium-term forecast that has been more relevant for my
policy votes on the MPC.
Third, a crucial but often ignored feature of the MPC’s forecast is that it is a conditional
forecast. It is not a prediction of the absolute probabilities of different outturns occurring.
Rather it is a forecast, or a scenario, of what might happen if the various conditioning
assumptions came true. It should be interpreted and reported as answering the question ‘if
all of these conditioning assumptions were to come true, how does the MPC think the
economy would evolve?’ These include conditioning assumptions for asset prices, for
government fiscal policy, and for energy prices. The biggest revisions in the MPC’s
inflation forecasts over the past 18 months have come from changes in the conditioning
path for energy prices, rather than changes in the rest of the forecast.
In some cases – such as for asset prices – these conditioning assumptions are as good
predictors of those variables as we have available. If the data turn out differently, then it is
a sign that the news came from an unpredictable shock. In other cases – such as for fiscal
policy – the conditioning assumption may not always be the best forecast for what is going
to happen. By convention, the MPC always assumes that fiscal policy will follow the latest
announced Government plans. But this need not constrain monetary policy decisions –

Bank of England

Page 14

MPC members can always consider alternative assumptions that they deem more likely
than the ones incorporated in our forecast.
These three aspects of the MPC’s forecast – uncertainty, the role of nowcasting, and
conditionality – are important to recognise when scrutinising forecast performance. It is to
be expected that there will be differences between the data and point estimates obtained
from the MPC’s forecast fan charts. And forecast errors in short-term forecasts often point
towards noise and volatility in the data. Importantly, changes in the conditioning
assumptions do not represent forecast errors, since the purpose of the forecasts is not to
try to predict how those conditioning variables will evolve.

Models
In one of my first speeches as an MPC member (Tenreyro, 2018), I discussed one
important input into the MPC’s forecasts and policy deliberations: economic models. The
key point I made then is that although models are useful, the MPC’s forecasts are based
on judgement, rather than unthinkingly following some model output. This had always
been the case, and continues to hold true today. There is no sense in which the models
can lead the forecasts astray, since the MPC is free to make any forecast it wishes,
independently of any of the assumptions or results in any of the models it consults.
This contrasted with some concerns about economic modelling, which focused on
particular simplifications of specific models, and worries that these simplifications could
mislead economists and policymakers. I explained how the way models were actually used
in practice by the MPC (and other policymakers) should assuage such worries. As well as
the overriding role of policymaker judgement in constructing any forecast, the MPC can
draw on findings from a range of different models, both within the Bank and in the wider
economics literature, depending on the question of interest.
I employed the oft-used analogy of models being like maps. Maps are extreme
simplifications of reality, but can still be useful for finding our way, provided we look at the
right map at the right time. Different MPC members will have different preferred models at
different times – such diversity of opinions is one of the advantages of having a committee.
Indeed, at any time, an infinite number of models could be constructed to be consistent
with almost any forecast. The role of the MPC is to piece together different intuitions from
different models, data, and its own experience, to decide on the best forecasts and policy
decisions.
Ultimately, it is the MPC that decides on any forecasts (albeit with considerable help from
Bank staff). This contrasts with some central banks where the staff produce forecasts
independently of policymakers. Subject to my points about how to judge the success or
otherwise of a forecast, any criticism of the forecasts should therefore be apportioned to
us, the MPC members who decide on them.

Bank of England

Page 15

Although their importance for the MPC’s forecasts is sometimes exaggerated, I discussed
in 2018 other places where models are essential. In particular, we can use models to give
quantitative estimates of different economic mechanisms, and to evaluate the effects of
different policies. I have used models for these purposes recently, to learn whether
counterfactual alternative monetary policy choices could have led to better outcomes over
the recent period of very high inflation.

Alternative policies
Looking at policy simulations reveals that irrespective of any MPC forecasts over the past
few years, it is questionable whether any realistic alternative monetary policy could have
better fulfilled the remit. Using quantitative estimates is essential in any such discussion of
policy, in order to allow a realistic assessment of its impact relative to other factors.
These simulations (Chart 6) ignore much of the preceding discussion on forecast
uncertainty. They ask what the MPC could have done if, hypothetically, it had been able to
perfectly predict future outcomes back in 2021, including the rise in energy and other
commodity prices stemming from the war in Ukraine.
The purple shaded area in the chart shows CPI inflation up to Q1 this year, and the
forecast beyond that, in our May MPR forecasts. The very steep profile of CPI inflation,
with a rapid increase and a rapid fall, largely as energy-price increases reverse, is one
reason why it would have been difficult for policy do anything materially different in line
with the remit.

Bank of England

Page 16

Chart 6: Counterfactual policy experiment
May 2023 inflation forecast

Per cent

Per cent

10

10

8

8

Inflation (after policy)

6

6

4

4

2

2

0

0

-2

-2

Example policy effect
-4
-6
2021

-4
-6
2022

2023

2024

Notes: Policy effect calculated as the difference between market rate and constant rate inflation forecasts in
the MPC’s November 2022 Monetary Policy Report, linearly scaled to the size needed to bring inflation to
2% in 2024 Q1.
Sources: Bank of England and Bank calculations.

The orange area layers on a counterfactual, tighter monetary policy. Specifically, it shows
a scenario where the MPC had raised rates far faster, starting in the fourth quarter of
2021, to reach almost 7% by 2022 Q2 and a peak of around 9½% this year. This also
happens to yield slightly more cumulative tightening than would be recommended by a
simple backward-looking Taylor rule of the type I discussed earlier.
The aqua line shows the counterfactual outcome for inflation. Despite raising interest rates
far more, inflation still peaks close to double digits, at a little over 9%. The larger benefit
would be next year, as the scenario is constructed so that inflation would come back to
target at the start of 2024, rather than reaching close to 2% at the end of the year. But this
would have had to be traded-off against the costs, in line with the MPC’s remit.
Unemployment would have needed to be around 4 percentage points higher to deliver this
extra reduction in inflation. And crucially, given our obligation to meet the inflation target in
the medium term, inflation would undershoot the target significantly later in 2024 and likely
to enter deflation in 2025.
To summarise, even if everything, including the Ukraine war, had been perfectly
predictable in advance, I judge that the increase in inflation we have seen would have
been broadly as prescribed by the MPC’s remit. The remit tells us to focus on the
medium-term inflation outlook, trading off inflation misses with real activity in the short run.

Bank of England

Page 17

4. Central bank communications
While always setting policy to best fulfil its remit, the MPC can also ensure trust and
credibility by being open and transparent, and explaining its actions to the public. The
Bank of England has long been at the forefront of transparent communication, initially
through publication of quarterly Monetary Policy Reports (previously Inflation Reports). It
has subsequently continued to take steps to enhance transparency, including publication
of further details about its forecasts and publishing minutes of MPC meetings alongside
votes.
The Bank has also improved the communication of MPC decisions in myriad ways over my
time on the committee. There have been improvements in the readability and accessibility
of flagship publications such as the Monetary Policy Report and the MPC minutes. There
has been a move towards layered communications at different levels of complexity for
different audiences. And there are now many additional fora for both speaking to and
listening to the views of both expert economists and the wider public.
We should always be striving to seek further improvements in transparency and
communications, however. Looking back on my own public communications, both
individually and collectively with the committee, it is worth reflecting on what I have learned
or where more could be done. There are three areas where I have come to think,
speculatively, that there could be beneficial improvements.
First, there may be scope for the MPC to redouble its efforts to explain the remit and the
UK’s flexible-inflation targeting framework. This was naturally a focus of much MPC
communication shortly after the committee was formed.16 Various speeches and papers
explained the flexibility inherent in the inflation target; its forward-looking nature; the role of
transmission lags; and trade-offs between the variability of inflation and the variability of
output. We should not take for granted that this understanding of the framework will
continue to remain present in people’s minds, a quarter of a century on.
Second, it may be useful to continue using multiple scenarios to explain policy decisions,
in turn de-emphasising central forecasts. This could help especially when there is large
uncertainty over conditioning assumptions, as the MPC has found over the past few years.
As discussed in Broadbent (2022), conditional statements and reasoning can often be
misconstrued. So using more scenarios may help alleviate those difficulties, avoiding
conditional forecasts being understood as unconditional ones.
Third and finally, I have come to think that the advantages of MPC members publishing
their own views (or paths) on future policy outweigh the potential costs.17 For example, I
16
17

See e.g. King (1997), George (1999), Bean (2003).
This could be done in speeches, not necessarily alongside the publication of the MPC’s forecast.

Bank of England

Page 18

judged it helpful to publish my preferred future path for interest rates in Tenreyro (2022).
As well as being transparent about my aims, expectations of future policy affect fixed-rate
interest rates charged and paid to borrowers and savers today, and hence determine part
of our current monetary stance. And there have been times when I have judged attempting
to influence future interest rates would be a more effective way to achieve a given stance
than changing Bank Rate. There are risks: policymakers’ views on future rates will change,
and it is possible that expectations are misinterpreted as promises. MPC members are
also individually accountable for their policy votes, which would make it more difficult for
the MPC to publish a collective view on future policy. Any moves towards this type of
guidance would certainly place a premium on effective communication.

5. Conclusion
The UK’s inflation targeting framework heralded a period of greater macroeconomic
stability in the UK. However, the enormous shocks that have affected the economy over
the past three years are the largest test the framework has faced. I have argued today that
the MPC should respond to those shocks in the way it always has: interpreting the data
through the lens of forward-looking forecasts; setting policy to return inflation to the 2%
target in the medium term; and transparently explaining how it is doing so.
With that forward-looking framework in mind, my vote to leave Bank Rate unchanged at
my final policy meeting rested on what the latest data implied about the medium term. It
also required looking ahead to assess whether the large cumulative amount of tightening
in train was sufficient to bring inflation back to target.
There had been some unexpected strength in recent inflation and wage growth data.
Private-sector pay, which had been growing more slowly on high-frequency measures for
several months, had accelerated. There had also been some stronger outturns for coregoods inflation. But translating those data into their implications for medium term
inflationary pressures requires forming forecasts about how they will evolve.
Forward-looking indicators had pointed towards falls in both pay growth and core-goods
inflation over the rest of the year. There had also been an increase in services inflation,
although that had been driven by components that held relatively little signal for future
inflationary pressures. Overall, although some of the news was likely to unwind, the data
could also be consistent with a slightly slower decline in domestic inflationary pressures. In
time, however, the continued reversal of the energy and other cost-push shocks would
weigh on goods inflation and, with a lag, on wage growth and services inflation.
Added to this, recent outturns had been determined by a significantly less restrictive
stance of policy than we now had in place. There had been rapid successive Bank Rate
increases over a period of several months, which would take some time to exert additional

Bank of England

Page 19

downward pressure on activity and inflation. More recently, there had also been a sharp
increase in interest rates at longer horizons – the disinflationary impact of this would be
more than sufficient to offset the recent data news, even in the unlikely event that all of
that news proved to be persistent. Overall, I therefore judged that the tightening already in
the pipeline would be sufficient to bring inflation back to, and most likely below, the target.
This has been an uncertain time for the economy, and setting policy in such circumstances
is challenging. But I have no doubt that the Bank of England and the MPC will continue
doing their best for the people of the United Kingdom, whatever challenges lie ahead.
I would like to thank Michael McLeay and Lukas von dem Berge for their help producing
this speech and for advice and support over the years. I am also grateful to Andrew Bailey,
Nicolò Bandera, Lauren Barnes, Natalie Burr, Matthieu Chavaz, Swati Dhingra,
Richard Harrison, Jonathan Haskel and Huw Pill for helpful comments and contributions.
The views are my own and do not necessarily represent those of the Bank of England or
its committees.

