Monetary Policy in the UK – The Framework and Current
Issues
Speech given by
Kate Barker, Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England

At the National Association of Business Economics Policy Conference, Washington DC.
21 March 2005

I am extremely grateful to Rebecca Driver and Miles Parker for their research towards this speech,
and to Peter Andrews, Charles Bean, Marian Bell, Rob Elder, Katie Farrant, Jennifer Greenslade,
Lavan Mahadeva, Steve Nickell, Lea Paterson, Sally Reid, Sally Srinivasan, Jumana Salaheen,
Alison Stuart and Jan Vlieghe, for their helpful and pertinent comments. Of course, this speech
reflects my personal views.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2
Monetary Policy in the UK – the Framework and Current Issues
Greetings.
It is a great pleasure for me to have been invited over to discuss with you our approach to
monetary policy in the UK. The UK system is still relatively young – just coming up to its
eighth birthday. The key changes made in 1997 were to give the Bank of England operational
independence to conduct monetary policy, and to specify a point inflation target. Initially
somewhat controversial, central bank independence is now strongly and widely supported.
Today, after a brief description of the key features of our framework, I will discuss some
issues related to inflation targeting, and also look at the implications for monetary policy of
recent trends in UK productivity.
The UK’s inflation targeting framework
The monetary policy framework put in place by the newly-elected Labour Government in
May 1997 leaves the Government to set the inflation target, which is confirmed or changed
annually in the finance minister’s Budget. It is a point target (presently 2%), and symmetric,
so that we place equal weight on deviations in either direction. Decisions about the repo rate
are taken monthly by a Monetary Policy Committee of nine individually accountable
members. Each of our votes carries equal weight, and the votes are made public within two
weeks of the policy announcement.
In considering the rationale for this structure, it is important to take account of the
background. From the mid-1970s, UK monetary policy pursued an unsteady course (Chart
One), at different times based on money supply targets (variously defined), and on exchange
rate targets (formal and informal). In 1992 sterling was forced out of the European Exchange
Rate Mechanism, and subsequently a target was introduced to reduce inflation over the course
of the 1992-97 parliament. This policy period was quite successful, but had some key
drawbacks. Most significant among these was the continued suspicion that interest rate
decisions, taken by the finance minister after consultation with the Bank of England
Governor, reflected political considerations.
The 1997 framework was a big step forward - clearly set up with permanence in mind, as
demonstrated by the passing of the Bank of England Act. Previous monetary frameworks had
changed at short notice, raising problems of time inconsistency (the suspicion that

3
governments will renege on monetary policy commitments for reasons of political
expediency). The operational independence of the Bank is therefore crucial, but the need to
ensure wide spread public support for central bank independence underpinned the decision,
also welcome on other grounds, to retain political control over the target itself.
Having a symmetric point inflation target means that there is now little room for uncertainty
about what the MPC is seeking to achieve, making it relatively straightforward for us to be
held to account by the Government, parliament more widely, and the public in general. For
the business community, there is clarity over the background relevant to their own price and
wage-setting. So this has been a sound framework within which the MPC has been able to
establish and retain credibility. The evidence from financial market inflation expectations is
that these fell sharply in 1997, and subsequently have remained broadly consistent with
achieving the target (Chart Two). The MPC has been successful in meeting the target; over
the 79 months in which our target was 2.5% based on the UK retail prices index excluding
mortgage interest payments (RPIX), the average inflation rate was 2.4%. Also, inflation has
never moved more than 1% either side of the target in any month (this is perhaps surprising,
as more variability in inflation might have been expected due to supply shocks, and would not
have indicated a policy failure). This success has been supported by a strong focus on
transparency and communication.
At the end of 2003, the MPC’s target was changed to 2%, but now based on the consumer
prices index. Formula differences in the calculation of the CPI means that it is about 0.5%
below RPIX. If this were all, there would be no effect on monetary policy even in the shortterm. But it is a little more complex than that, as there are coverage differences, in particular
that the CPI excludes housing costs, and over the long-term the difference is around 0.7%.
The changeover has been successfully handled, and the fact that this was not a matter of much
economic significance is well understood in financial markets.
What are the issues for policymakers of operating with an inflation target?
The use of inflation-targeting is certainly not without its critics – either generic criticisms of
the whole approach, or relating to the particular remit and approach of an individual central
bank. The following comments on some key points in this debate are based only on the
framework and experience at the Bank of England, and in the time available cannot do full
justice to the complexity of the question.

4
Inflation and output trade-off
Initially, a criticism from both business and the wider public was that the primacy of the
inflation target puts too little weight on output and unemployment. However, one success of
our communication is that many businesses at least now understand better that in the longterm real variables will not be affected by the course of nominal developments. But of course
since 1997 the UK economy has experienced continuous growth - whether this understanding
would prove durable through any future period of sharp downturn is not clear.
The UK framework and the MPC’s approach also enables output volatility to be taken into
account when that is desirable. By tackling the remit in a forward-looking manner, focussing
on prospects for inflation for the medium-term, we are able to allow the first-round, direct
effects from shocks (such as big rises in the oil price, or changes in indirect taxation), to feed
through to inflation, directing our focus at the possibility of second-round effects if the jump
in the price level impacts on wages. In the instance of a deviation from target which is more
than 1 percentage point away in either direction, the Governor is required to write to the
Government setting out the MPC’s strategy for returning to target, providing an opportunity
in these circumstances to clarify that we were seeking to avoid unnecessary output volatility
(where this applies with smaller deviations a similar point would be made in the published
minutes of the policy meeting).
More technically, it is argued that the focus on inflation-targeting reduces flexibility and
implies that real objectives are not incorporated in an optimal manner1. Certainly the MPC’s
approach aims to be appropriately flexible, rather than overly rule-based. The response to a
medium-term central forecast for inflation which is away from the target in either direction
(based on the Committee’s views of the most likely economic projection), is not an automatic
change in the repo rate. Rather, the risks to the outlook, and the question of whether a change
should be delayed, will be considered. Often this will be embodied in the mean of the
inflation forecast being away from the mode over the medium-term, as indeed it was during
the February 2005 forecasting round. But my view would be that the MPC should be
prepared to contemplate the mean of the forecast, around the two-year horizon, being away
from the target if this were due primarily to a supply shock, and if the interest rate response
needed to bring inflation to target more quickly would lead to significant output volatility.

1

See, for example, Woodford (2004)

5
Can these trade-offs, and the role of goals other than inflation, be communicated clearly
within the inflation targeting approach?2 It is argued that lack of clarity could weaken claims
to policy transparency, and risks an undue focus on inflation as the only quantified target.
With regard to the former, the variety of possible economic conjunctures and their associated
risks make any attempt to specify trade-off rules in general terms a rather fruitless exercise.
But the onus is indeed on the MPC to account for how and why output concerns have affected
any particular decision. And while the latter is certainly a theoretical possibility, the
distinction of demand and supply shocks in our thinking suggests that in the UK we are very
conscious of the need to strike an appropriate trade-off.
Potential conflicts with minimising output fluctuations
There is another issue which might be thought of as a disadvantage of a precise target. In
general, it is the case that one result of successful inflation targeting is to limit output
fluctuations away from trend. But it is possible to imagine some conflicts. For example, in
the UK, CPI inflation was more than 0.5 percentage points below target between July and
October 2004. At the same time the economy was growing broadly around trend, and
unemployment was at a historically low level. Evidence from business surveys of capacity
utilisation chimed with the conclusion of model-based estimates in suggesting that the
economy was operating at around full capacity. One of the reasons for this low inflation was
the weak trend in import prices. If these circumstances had persisted, then it was possible that
the only way in which inflation could be returned to target would have been to allow the rate
of growth to be above trend for a time.
Allowing the economy to run above trend to stimulate higher inflation and then slowing it in
order to prevent a target overshoot seems rather unattractive. It implies considerable
confidence in the ability of monetary policy to fine-tune developments, and runs the risk that
it will be more difficult than expected to brake the rise in the inflation rate once it is
underway. This risk can however be lessened by seeking to return inflation to the target
rather gradually. And if inflation expectations are based around the target, and the monetary
authorities are credible, then there will be some momentum towards the target in price and
wage-setting. But to retain this valuable credibility, it is important both that the target is
regained, and that monetary policy is clearly set to achieve this. In fact, in the UK,

2

Faust and Henderson (2004)

6
subsequent events have changed the picture. One is that the CPI has in any case moved up
towards target over the past three months. Another, discussed further below, is the possibility
that capacity may be a little less tight.
However, it is in principle correct to be concerned about inflation being below target, even if
the level of output seems to be close to trend, in order to demonstrate the importance attached
to the symmetry of the inflation target. In the UK, influenced by the lengthy period of
economic history dominated by a concern to control high and volatile inflation, it is argued
that there were signs over the late 1980s and 1990s, of a precautionary bias in policy in favour
of low inflation, rather than economic expansion.3 It is important to demonstrate that such
asymmetries no longer exist.
The asset price issue
While questions about trade-offs and communication are important, a criticism that would be
more significant if justified is that central banks do not pay enough attention to asset prices.
In the four years since I joined the UK’s MPC, we have been criticised for allowing the
exchange rate to remain too strong, and more recently for permitting a bubble to develop in
the housing market (several commentators remain concerned that there is a risk of a
widespread downturn when this possible bubble bursts). In general, I consider there are good
reasons for not acting to offset movements in asset prices per se. The first is the considerable
uncertainty about whether or not a bubble exists – and if it does, how serious it is.
For example, while UK house prices are certainly at historically high levels at present,
relative to incomes, there are factors which support an increased equilibrium price: lower
interest rates lowering the initial cost of a mortgage; low long-term real interest rates (which
have increased the asset value of housing); an inadequate supply of new build; increased use
of housing as a savings vehicle for pensions. There are some signs which might indicate a
housing bubble – increased private buying of housing for letting with the expectation of
capital gain, and parents using equity from their own homes to assist children with deposits –
but it is not clear how far these may have contributed to higher prices. So it would also not be
clear what scale of adjustment in house prices monetary policy should seek to achieve.

3

Cukierman and Muscatelli (2002)

7
More importantly, a shift to targeting asset prices might result in significant changes of
interest rates away from the level which would be appropriate to achieve the inflation target.
This is likely to create uncertainty about what the aims of monetary policy are, and lead to
volatile inflation expectations. In particular, there is a risk that the central bank would end up
chasing one asset price after another, with real costs in terms of uncertain strategy – similar
indeed to the problems experienced in the UK in the 1970s and 1980s.
Concluding that asset prices should not be targeted does not of course mean that their impact
on the economy and the related risk of volatility can be ignored. As suggested by fellow
MPC member Charlie Bean, concerns about major economic volatility which could result
from a bubble deflating is a factor which should be taken into account in discussing risks
around a central forecast, and therefore could have some effect on current decisions4. In
practice this means giving a bit more weight to possible major deviations from the inflation
target which might be beyond the usual policy horizon of around two years ahead.
The worry about house prices reflects a view that the low level of inflation over the past few
years is partly due to external factors (the strong exchange rate and very weak world goods
price inflation). The consequent low nominal interest rates may have encouraged consumers
to increase debt burdens to unsustainable levels, due to unrealistic income expectations. In
the UK the household savings rate has declined from around 9-11% in the early 1990s to
around 6% in 1998, below the 8% average since 1963. But since 2000 it has remained
broadly stable, and consumer spending has moved generally in line with income growth. It
seems equally likely that most of the rise in debt has resulted from more stable economic
conditions in the UK, with strong competition among loan providers enabling more effective
consumption smoothing for those with sound long-term income prospects. Alongside this
there are a number of low income households whose debt levels pose real problems.
A current question: is recent low UK inflation related to a productivity improvement?
A central question faced by any monetary policy regime in considering the appropriate tradeoff between inflation and output variability is identifying structural change. So in considering
how to respond to the recent surprisingly low rate of UK inflation discussed above, it is
necessary to identify the cause. Distinguishing between candidate explanations remains

4

Bean, 2003

8
difficult, but one possibility is that the UK is now experiencing the kind of improvements in
productivity that the US saw around a decade earlier. This was not evident to policymakers in
the (official) US productivity data at the time, but became clear through subsequent data
revisions. However, on the basis in particular of higher ICT investment, improving profit
margins, and anecdotal and survey evidence from business, a number of FOMC members
argued that there were signs of a favourable productivity shock, some time ahead of
confirmation from the data.
To what extent, picking up on a description of the US economy in the late 1990s, might it be
true that Goldilocks has acquired a holiday home? In the UK, GDP growth over the past eight
years has averaged 2.8% - above the average of the previous 25 years. Yet inflation has
remained low, and surprisingly so, even when account has been taken of factors such as
subdued import price inflation. Data on UK productivity (Chart 3) suggests some pick-up in
private sector output per head in the late 1990s, with a slowdown in 2001-02. Over the past
year, labour productivity per head and per hour have picked up quite sharply, but this is a very
short period from which to draw conclusions about a change of trend. Is there any reason to
believe that there have been some similar measurement issues, and the recovery in
productivity was present earlier?
Certainly, ICT capital investment did pick up in the UK during the 1990s. Oulton and
Srinivasan5 suggest that ICT capital does boost productivity growth, though with a lag. But
they argue that successful implementation of ICT projects requires costly reorganisation
which obscures the productivity benefits for a time. This might support the idea that the
recent pickup is the fruition of this ICT capital, and the recent strong relative performance of
UK distribution sector productivity might suggest that this sector has reaped these gains
earlier (Chart 4). But there are also reasons to be cautious. Work by McKinsey6 tentatively
suggests that IT investment is less important to productivity than management capabilities,
and further that the UK has not, in general, been quick to adopt innovative management
techniques.
Unlike the US, where the profit share was strong in the mid-1990s, in the UK private sector
gross operating surplus was declining during the late 1990s. It has picked up since 2001, but
5
6

Oulton and Srinivasan (2005, forthcoming)
Casserley (2004)

9
remains below the mid-1990s peak. Of course, it is possible that any productivity stimulus in
the UK is coming from a different source. Rather than arising from better use of ICT
investment, as in the US, firms might have been through a period of increased competitive
pressures (due both to globalisation and to more intense domestic competition policy).
Ultimately the companies that survive this period will seek to improve margins, in order to
earn adequate returns.
Nor has the UK experienced any particular discrepancy with regard to productivity growth
between the real-time official data and company comment – except possibly as regards
manufacturing, where anecdote about productivity has been stronger than the data for some
time. And business survey data on capacity utilisation accords with the view that capacity
utilisation is at fairly high levels, as has been the case broadly since 1995.
While the UK evidence does not indicate the same statistical discrepancy as in the US,
productivity measurement remains uncertain in the service sector, and there is always a
possibility that future data improvements will produce a different picture of the past few
years. The most recent period, based on current data, does show a pickup in output per hour,
and there are factors which might support a continued improvement, including a lagged
response to ICT investment, or the stimulus of stronger competition. Both of these
explanations could lie behind the gains in distribution sector productivity, which began in
2002. However, 2004 has also been a recovery period, with rising hours worked suggesting
more intensive use of labour. It is likely to be several quarters yet until it is possible to
distinguish a cyclical pickup from a trend improvement – although equally the latter cannot be
ruled out.
The rise in hours worked (average hours per week for all workers have risen by around 0.5
hours from a low point in mid-2004) prompts a slightly different question. Since 1998, hours
have generally been declining, and this reversal might indicate that a greater part of the recent
decline reflected cyclical factors rather than a structural trend. In this case, the labour market
might be a little less tight, and the supply capacity of the economy somewhat better.
Conclusion
The framework for monetary policy put in place in the UK in 1997, with operational
independence for the central bank, has won widespread acceptance and support. It has

10
weathered some economic squalls, although it is perhaps true to say that it has not yet been
tested by a serious storm. The key features of the regime – the symmetric inflation target, the
forward-looking nature of decision-taking, and a committee of independently accountable
individuals – have all played a part in marking a considerable improvement from the previous
history of UK monetary policy decision-taking.
In this context, point inflation targeting has been helpful in communicating clearly about the
new regime, and anchoring inflation expectations. There have been criticisms of the
framework – in particular that there is insufficient focus on stabilising output, and that
insufficient attention is paid to asset prices. But I believe that the practice of UK monetary
policy, and the MPC’s communication of it, mean that these criticisms are misplaced. For a
policymaker, stress on practice is crucial – we know our forecast will not be exactly right, and
that the economy may not respond to policy changes quite as we expect. In these
circumstances, precise rules about trade-offs are not helpful, but clarity about our objective is.
Finally, is the UK now set to enjoy a period of a Goldilocks economy, in which strong
productivity enables faster growth to be combined with achieving the inflation target? The
evidence is building, but cannot yet support optimism similar to that of the US in the mid1990s. While the latest data has suggests some productivity improvement, it is too early to
reject the alternative explanation that this is simply a cyclical rise. Further, given some signs
of relatively poor adoption of best practice management techniques in the UK, a degree of
scepticism about productivity gains from ICT seems justified. However, over the coming
quarters it will be necessary to look hard at this question, and remain open to the possibility of
a structural improvement. A different reason to reconsider the judgement about the present
and prospective supply capacity of the economy is the possibility that the recent rise in
average hours worked suggests a stronger trend in hours, and that the labour market is not
quite as tight as presently estimated.
Over coming months, the MPC will no doubt continue to reflect on these and other issues.
And I hope we will continue to examine suggestions for improving policy communication and
transparency with an open mind.

11
References
Bean, Charles, “Asset Prices, Financial Imbalances and Monetary Policy: Are Inflation
Targets Enough?” in Anthony Richards and Tim Robinson (eds.) Asset prices and monetary
policy, Conference volume, Reserve Bank of Australia, March 2003
Casserley, Dominic, “How can the UK close the productivity gap?” Speech by UK Managing
Partner, McKinsey & Company, 15 March 2004
Cukierman, Alex and Muscatelli, V Anton, “Do central banks have precautionary demands
for expansions and for price stability? – Theory and evidence”, CESIFO Working Paper no
764, August 2002
Faust, Jon and Henderson, Dale W, “Is Inflation Targeting Best-Practice Monetary Policy?”,
Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis Review, July/August 2004
Oulton, Nicholas and Srinivasan, Sylaja, “Productivity growth in UK industries, 1970-2000:
structural change and the role of ICT” Bank of England Working Paper, 2005 (forthcoming)
Svensson, Lars E.O. (chair), “An Independent Review of Monetary Policy and Institutions in
Norway” Norges Bank Watch, 2002
Woodford, Michael, “Inflation Targeting and Optimal Monetary Policy”, Federal Reserve
Bank of St Louis Review, July/August 2004

12

Chart 1: The history of UK inflation

Medium term
financial strategy

Percentage change
on a year earlier

DM
ERM
'Shadowing' Membership

25
MPC Framework
20

15
Inflation targeting

10

5

0
1976

1979

1982

1985

1988

1991

1994

1997

2000

2003

Note: The solid blue line in this chart shows the annual rate of RPIX inflation. The target for RPIX was 2.5% from June 1997 to
December 2003 and is shown by the dashed blue line. The solid pink line shows the annual rate of CPI inflation. The target
for CPI inflation has been 2.0% since December 2003 and is shown by the dashed pink line.

Chart 2: Market expectations of RPI inflation
Exit ERM

%
8.0

BoE Independence

7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
1985

1988

1991

1994

1997

2000

2003

Note: This chart shows the ten-year ahead annual inflation forward rate, defined as the difference between the ten-year ahead
annual nominal rate and the ten-year ahead annual real rate, as calculated from nominal and index-linked government
bonds.
RPI is the measure of inflation used for index linked bonds, but is not the target measure for inflation in the UK. RPI will
differ from both RPIX and CPI. Part of these differences reflect the coverage of the index, for example, RPI includes
mortgage interest payments. In addition, RPI will typically be higher than CPI due to a formula effect, as the CPI uses a
geometric mean rather than an arithmetic mean to aggregate individual prices within each expenditure category.

13

Chart 3: Private sector productivity
Percentage change on a year earlier
6
5
Per hour
4

Per head

3
2
1
0
1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Note: Data on private sector output are measured in chained volume terms, defined as GDP minus the output of public
administration, education and health sectors. Data on private sector heads and hours are based on LFS microdata.

Chart 4: Productivity growth per head
Percentage change on a year earlier
6
5

Distribution sector

4

Private sector

3
2
1
0
-1
1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Note: Data on private sector output are measured in chained volume terms, defined as GDP minus the output of public
administration, education and health sectors. Data on private sector heads are based on LFS microdata. Labour productivity
in the distribution sector is defined as gross value added at basic prices divided by employment.

