Monetary Policy, Data Uncertainty and the Supply-Side: Living
With the Statistical Fog
Speech given by
Marian Bell, Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England

To the Society of Business Economists at the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and
Accountancy in London
15 September 2004

I would like to thank Lavan Mahadeva and Alex Muscatelli for their considerable research support in
preparing this speech and for allowing me to draw extensively on their work, Jonathan Marrow for
technical support, and Martene Giles and Helen Jay for secretarial assistance. I am grateful to Kate
Barker, Charlie Bean, Rebecca Driver, Jenni Greenslade, Neal Hatch, Simon Hayes, Mervyn King,
Robin Lynch, Benjamin Martin, Colin Mowl, Edward Nelson, Jumana Salaheen, Sally Srinivasan,
Nick Stern, Geoffrey Wood and Tony Yates for helpful comments received on an earlier draft. I am
also grateful to Carl Walsh for allowing me to use and show results from his research.
The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of England or other
members of the Monetary Policy Committee.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2
Monetary policy, data uncertainty and the supply-side: living with the statistical
fog
“For, tell me, do you think our prisoners could see anything of themselves or their
fellows except the shadows thrown by the fire on the wall of the cave opposite them?
…. And would they see anything more of the objects carried along the road? …Then if
they were able to talk to each other would they not assume that the shadows they saw
were the real things? …And if the wall of their prison opposite them reflected sound,
don’t you think that they would suppose, whenever one of the passers-by on the road
spoke, that the voice belonged to the shadow passing before them? ….
And so in every way they would believe that the shadows of the objects …... were the
whole truth.”1
In this way, Plato in “The Republic” helps his pupil Glaucon to “picture the
enlightenment or ignorance of our human condition”.
Economic statistics are often only an approximation of the underlying reality they are
attempting to measure. Like the prisoners in Plato’s cave, we risk confusing the
shadows we see with the abstract notions of economic theory. And when a change in
the light causes the shadows to change we may become angry, suspecting that we
have been misled, failing to see that the truth has not changed and that the different
image might be a source of knowledge.
This evening, I would like to spend some time looking at the various ways in which
data uncertainty might arise, attempting to evaluate the extent of our ignorance, before
moving on to discuss how the monetary policy maker might discern developments in
inflationary pressure in the face of such uncertainty. In particular I shall examine
uncertainty over how the measured money value of spending and output in an
economy is allocated between prices and volumes; and how that could affect the
relative weight a policymaker might choose to place on measures of growth in the
money value or in the volume of national output, and on the level of output and the
output gap.

1

Plato, The Republic (translated by Desmond Lee), Penguin Classics.

3

Conceptual discrepancy
Much recent interest has been over data measurement issues and revisions policies.
And I intend to devote some time to these issues this evening. But first we should
recognise that this is not the only source of data related uncertainty. Even when data
can be perfectly measured, there is often a discrepancy between the economic concept
that we would like to measure and the real world phenomenon that the statistics
attempt to measure.
Take money data for example; in my view some of the most timely and accurate data
available – largely directly measured, so suffering little from sampling problems,
rather less vulnerable to late returns than many other series, and yet a pot-pourri of
financial balances held in an arbitrarily defined set of financial institutions for a
multitude of reasons, for transactions, savings, a store of value, a buffer stock.
Or the claimant count: again, precisely defined and directly measured. But how
important is it as a measure of unemployment, or the tightness of the labour market?
Both the Retail Price and the Consumer Price Indices are measured from information
on the prices of a defined basket of goods and services collected on a particular day
each month, weighted together in a particular way. There are some differences in
methodology between the two series, and yet both measure the same underlying
concept – consumer price inflation. Moving from one measure to another does not
mean by itself that our view of the underlying concept has changed, but it does mean
that we need to understand how each measure is put together.
So, before we even begin to think about how accurately data are measured, we need to
give some thought to what it is we are seeking to measure, and how accurately can the
data, no matter how well measured, capture the underlying concept.
A measure of consumption that we can relate to theories of how consumers behave
would be consumer spending on non-durable goods and services plus the flow of
services enjoyed from durable goods. But this latter component is not observable. So
in practice what the statisticians try to measure is household expenditure on durable
goods, as well as on services and non-durable goods. And no matter how well they

4
succeed in accurately measuring household spending, there will still be a difference
between that and what we would wish to measure.
The Monetary Policy Committee has recently spent some time looking at measures of
government activity. We are not alone in this, so has Sir Tony Atkinson who is
presently investigating how to improve the measurement of government services.
What has become very clear in this work has been the importance in identifying what
it is we are trying to measure. For the MPC, the interest has been in identifying the
inflationary pressure generated by government activity. That depends on the
resources absorbed by the public sector and how that affects the ability of the market
sector of the economy to meet the demand for its goods and services. Sir Tony
Atkinson’s review concentrates on measuring the volume of government output
within the context of the national accounts, recognising their dual function as a
measure both of economic activity and of welfare. And, as his Interim Review says,
any change to “the direct measure of government output should not affect the macroeconomic policy stance.” 2
Measurement uncertainty and revisions
Not all economic series can be directly measured. Many more must be estimated.
Gross Domestic Product seeks to measure the total economic activity, the value
added, that takes place within the United Kingdom. It would be a gargantuan task to
measure this directly, to attempt to track every economic transaction, and would
impose an intolerable administrative burden on businesses and consumers. Much of
the data that we commonly use therefore have to be estimated from surveys. This
gives rise to measurement issues stemming from problems of coverage, sampling and
non-response.
Official statistics can thus be subject to significant uncertainty, especially in timely
first releases. Revisions then inevitably arise from new information that improve the
accuracy of the data– a late return perhaps, or a more in depth survey carried out with
less frequency. Some may arise from methodological improvements such as the
revisions to the measurement of the output of the National Health Service, or the
move to annual chain linking.

2

Atkinson (2004).

5

Data quality and monetary policy
The Monetary Policy Committee recognises that revisions are inevitable. Indeed, in
so far as they bring us to a better understanding of the underlying reality, we welcome
them. And it is incumbent on us, collectively and individually, to try and make the
best decision possible each month in the light of the information available to us at the
time and our interpretation of it.
In doing so we recognise that much of the data with which we work is imperfect and
subject to revision. We recognise that data quality varies within the release cycle, that
the preliminary estimate may be different to the final release, and that some series are
more reliable than others. It is the job of all users of economic statistics to recognise
and deal with this. There is inevitably a trade-off between timeliness and accuracy,
but in general, aware of the shortcomings, we would prefer early imperfect data to late
perfect series – it gives us something to work with.
At the Bank3 data quality is typically assessed in terms of its:
Relevance – how closely does it accord with the underlying concept we want to
measure for the purpose of inflation targeting;
Accuracy – how well is it measured and how much is it revised;
Timeliness – is it released within a timescale that makes it useful for policy purposes;
Coherence – how well does it relate to other pieces of data, over time and across the
economy.
We are aware of the scope for revision to many data series and we are continuously
developing models that help us assess how much weight to place on a particular
observation of data at any point in time.
Price-volume uncertainty
A particular difficulty can be in allocating movements in nominal variables to price
and volume changes. This matters for monetary policy; not just because monetary
policy is concerned with the price level and its rate of change, but because the
policymaker aims to achieve a stable inflation rate by ensuring that the volume of
demand for an economy’s output grows in line with its potential to supply. And it is

3

The criteria used draw on the work of Brackstone (1999).

6
on this source of data uncertainty and its policy implications that I’d like to
concentrate this evening.
Conceptually it seems fairly clear. In practice it is fraught with difficulty. If one buys
a car one year for £10,000 but a similar model costs £11,000 a year later it might
seem straightforward. The price has risen by 10%. But what if the car now has air
conditioning, and a cd player comes as standard? Suppose crash test statistics suggest
it has a better safety performance? How do we then allocate the change in the cost of
the car between quantity and price?4
A further complication arises when we are considering not just the output of one
good, or the expenditure on one good, but the production or consumption of a basket
of goods and services. How should the components of total output or total expenditure
be weighted together?5
In general, national accounts statistics are compiled by bringing together data on
values and prices from surveys. Typically, these will be surveys covering, for
example, firms' turnover, expenditure, income and profits, consumers' expenditure,
income, etc. To calculate the aggregate real volume change, data from the various
production sectors of the economy are weighted together, with the weights for each
sector typically determined by the current price value share of that sector in wholeeconomy output in a base year. Direct volume measures are available for few series.
Similarly, data for the various expenditure aggregates are weighted together according
to the share of that category of expenditure in total expenditure, defined in terms of
current value, in the base year.
Periods when value shares change notably from the base period, reflecting changing
economic structures and relative prices, are therefore periods of high data uncertainty
or “mismeasurement”.

4

One way statistical agencies deal with quality change is by the use of “hedonic regressions”
recommended by the Price Statistics Review Committee (US) way back in 1961. The idea is that the
characteristics of the goods rather than the goods themselves are the true components of the utility
function (outputs of the production function) and that heterogeneous goods are an aggregation of
characteristics. Hedonic regression relates the price of these goods to data on the characteristics
themselves (such as processing speed in computers, or the number of rooms in houses).
5

See Tuke and Reed (2001) and Lynch (1996) for a description of alternative methodologies.

7
The exact nature of this “mismeasurement” depends on the source of these relative
movements and the price elasticities of the goods. The most well known case is that of
“substitution bias” with fixed-weight indices. Substitution bias arises if goods the
relative prices of which are falling are also those the volumes of which are rising, but
such that their value share is decreasing. In that case a fixed-weight index, which
failed to update weights as relative prices changed, would overstate volume growth
and understate inflation.
Revisions to data
Like most economic statistics, national accounts data are revised regularly, with
revisions taking into account both new information and new methodologies. Regular
rebasing ensures that changes in industry structures and/or relative prices are taken
into account in the production of aggregate data. Through the introduction of
methodological changes such as more frequent rebasing and chain-linking statistical
offices are, in a sense, responding to price-volume uncertainty error by periodically
bringing in new information on relative prices, and on the relative importance of each
sector of the economy.
Until last year, the ONS rebased the national accounts every five years. Last
September, annual chain-linking of real GDP data was introduced. Real GDP growth
in each year (up to 2001) was calculated on the basis of weights measured as the
current price share of total activity in the previous year. The main rationale behind
the introduction of annual chain-linking was that annual rebasing would give a more
accurate picture of the weight of each sector in the economy.
Here we look at vintages of quarterly real and nominal GDP data going back to
1989Q36. We have made no attempt to separate the different types of revisions across
these vintages, nor to isolate revisions to the price-volume split. 7 Chart 1 plots the
cumulative revisions in growth rates, where the cumulative revision is defined as the
6

Ellis and Castle (2002) discuss the construction of a database that contains successive releases of data
for the expenditure measure of real GDP and its components.
7
Akritidis (2003) provides an analysis of revisions to real GDP growth estimates in the UK, showing
that a substantial part of revisions to initial estimates of real GDP growth is due to revisions to the data
following the second Blue Book, i.e. the second time the estimate of GDP has appeared in a Blue
Book. GDP data at this stage are subject to balancing in the Supply and Use input-output balancing
framework for the second time or more. We checked to see if correlations changed when we restricted
ourselves to data that had been through at least two Blue Books (up to 2001 Q4) and found that the
correlation between quarterly GDP deflator inflation revisions and quarterly GDP growth revisions
became only slightly more negative.

8
percentage point difference between the initial release of data and the latest vintage
(the release of June 30th 2004 in this case). Table 1 summarises the statistics on the
revisions.
Table 1. Summary statistics on cumulative
revisions to quarterly growth rates of GDP
data (1989Q3-2004Q1 vintages, 59
observations)
Mean
revision

Mean
absolute
revision

Chart 1. Cumulative revisions to quarterly growth rates
Percentage points
Nominal GDP

0.8
0.6

Standard
deviation

0.4
0.2

Nominal GDP
(quarterly growth)*

0.24

0.54

0.67

0.0
-0.2

Real GDP (quarterly
growth) (a)*

0.13

0.27

Real GDP

0.35
GDP deflator

GDP deflator
(quarterly growth)
(b)*
Correlation between
(a) and (b)
*Percentage points

0.11

0.54

-0.4
-0.6
-0.8
-1.0

0.70

1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003

-0.35
Note: Centred three-quarter moving average

Some patterns stand out. First, quarterly real GDP growth and GDP deflator inflation
have both been revised up on average over this period, and by roughly the same
amount as measured by arithmetic mean revisions (column 1). The mean absolute
revision in the second column measures the absolute size of these revisions without
taking account of whether they were positive or negative. This absolute measure
shows that quarterly deflator inflation rates have been revised by more on average
than have real growth rates. And the third column shows that deflator inflation
revisions are more volatile, as shown by a larger standard deviation, so that it is more
difficult to predict them than it is real growth revisions. Revisions to nominal GDP
growth are on average larger and slightly more variable than those to real GDP
growth.
Taken together, this pattern of revisions might suggest that new information on
nominal values and prices play a significant role in data revisions. But most
interesting for us is to note that the revisions to prices and volumes have been, to
some extent, offsetting – the correlation between cumulative revisions to the deflator

9
inflation and real growth across quarters is minus 0.35 – at least for this period. This
is consistent with the presence of price-volume measurement error in early releases8.
Price-volume uncertainty in early releases was also apparent in the revisions
contained in the 2003 Blue Book, which brought in annual chain-linking accompanied
by perhaps the most significant set of data revisions for some time. The real annual
GDP growth rate between 1995 and 2001 was revised up by 0.2 percentage points on
average. The average revision to annual growth of nominal GDP over the same period
was zero. This was mainly due to significant upward revisions in real growth and
downward revisions in the annual GDP deflator inflation rate in the 1999-2000
period.
In terms of components, the revisions to real GDP growth in the 2003 Blue Book
primarily reflected revisions to imports and investment. Charts 2 and 3 show how the
revisions to investment left the level of nominal investment broadly unchanged, but
shifted up the level of real investment considerably. The revisions to investment
growth primarily reflect a rebasing of producer prices to 2000 (previously 1995). The
rebasing led to downward revisions to investment deflators, and hence upward
revisions to volume growth reflecting a greater weight given to those goods such as
computers which had experienced rapidly falling prices and rising volumes.9

8

See also Maitland-Smith (2004).
Because chain-linking is not done at the very lowest level of aggregation, rebasing of this type can
affect volumes growth. As the producer price data will not be rebased in the near future, the
investment data will remain vulnerable to this sort of measurement issue, if relative prices continue to
move significantly.
9

10

Chart 2. Real whole economy investment, before
and after BB 2003

Chart 3. Nominal whole economy investment,
before and after BB 2003

£mn

£ mn
45000

45000
After BB

After BB (CVM 2000 prices)

40000

40000

35000

35000

30000

30000

Before BB (1995 prices)

Before BB

25000

25000

20000
1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

20000
1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

More frequent rebasing brings in more information and makes the measurement of
real growth rates more accurate. However the level of real output is not comparable
across time periods when weights change. A levels series is therefore created by
chain linking growth rates across base periods.
Not surprisingly therefore, Table 2 shows that cumulative revisions to the level of
GDP are on average higher, though rather less variable around the mean, than
revisions to growth rates.

2002

11

Table 2. Summary statistics on cumulative
revisions to real GDP data (1989Q3-2004Q1
vintages)
Mean
revision
Real GDP (level)*

1.39

Mean
absolute
revision

Standard
deviation

0.56

0.68

Chart 4. Cumulative revisions to levels
Percentage
5
Nominal GDP
level

4

Real GDP level

3
2

Real GDP (quarterly
growth)**

0.13

0.27

0.35

1
GDP deflator

0
-1

1989

*% of first release of
data
** Percentage points

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

Note: Centred three-quarter moving average

Of course, levels data on anything are rarely informative by themselves, but must be
understood in relation to something else, such as its own value in the previous period
or another variable: GDP in relation to population; debt in relation to assets, and so
on. Later we shall look at the level of output in relation to potential, or the output
gap.
Monetary policy implications of price-volume uncertainty
How does the presence of price-volume data uncertainty affect the weight a policy
maker should place on different kinds of information when setting interest rates?
And if relationships established in old vintages of data stand to be revised, when does
this have implications for a monetary policymaker’s view of the future inflationary
pressure?
Here I will focus on two dimensions. First, how much information is there in nominal
GDP growth data compared to real GDP growth data. Second, how much weight
should a policymaker place on growth as against levels data and estimates of the
output gap that are derived from levels data.

2001

2003

12
Nominal versus real data
One response to price-volume uncertainty could be that at times when relative prices
change significantly, and trying to assess the split between real activity and a price
index is difficult, looking at a money value measure of activity may be informative.
As the Governor said last year10 “…it is easier to measure the money value of
spending and output in the economy than to split it into estimates of "real" output, on
the one hand, and price indices, on the other. That is why the latest data revisions
have altered the picture of real growth over recent years, leaving estimated money
spending and output broadly unchanged. In such circumstances it is sensible to focus
on money spending. Indeed, the success of the new monetary framework can be seen
in the stability not just of retail price inflation but also of the growth rate of domestic
demand in money terms.” Charts 5 and 6 below show the greater stability of the
growth rates of nominal domestic demand and nominal GDP in recent years.
Chart 5: Nominal domestic demand growth

Chart 6: Nominal GDP growth
annual % change

annual % change

35

30

30

25

25

20

20

15

15

10

10

5
0
1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000

5
0
1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000

Here I want to consider the value of nominal GDP data in an inflation targeting
regime, where the objective is to keep inflation close to target without excessive
volatility in real output. It should be stressed that I am not talking about a nominal
GDP targeting framework here. That is beyond the scope of this evening’s talk. Here
I will consider nominal GDP data as but one in a set of indicators that jointly help
understand the development of domestic inflationary pressure as captured by the true,
unobserved output gap. In particular I assume that reliable inflation data on the target

10

King (2003).

13
measure is also available. So the issue is really whether nominal GDP growth data can
complement real growth data.
A simple way of assessing the worth of nominal GDP growth data against that of real
GDP growth data might be to compare how well each would do in estimating the
unobservable change in the output gap.
Let us suppose that real GDP growth is mismeasured only because of price-volume
mismeasurement. Our assumption that the price-volume mismeasurement error affects
real GDP growth data in the opposite direction to the deflator inflation data means
that nominal GDP is accurately measured. CPI inflation is also accurately measured,
but is assumed to diverge from GDP deflator inflation by an error term.
Equations (1) and (2) below show how each data source is linked to the change in the
output gap. For simplicity we assume, for the moment, that true potential output
growth is known.

REAL GDP GROWTH DATA = CHANGE IN THE OUTPUT GAP
+ POTENTIAL OUTPUT GROWTH + PRICE-VOLUME MISMEASUREMENT
(1)
NOMINAL GDP GROWTH DATA – CPI INFLATION
= CHANGE IN THE OUTPUT GAP + POTENTIAL OUTPUT GROWTH
+ OTHER DEFLATOR MISMEASUREMENT

(2)

Comparing (1) and (2), we can see that there is a trade-off between price-volume
mismeasurement and other sources of GDP deflator mismeasurement. If there is
greater uncertainty over the price-volume split in nominal GDP than there is over the
assessment of GDP deflator inflation, using an independent measure of inflation such
as the CPI, then nominal GDP growth data (deflated by CPI inflation) will be
relatively more useful in gauging the build-up of inflationary pressure. But if
uncertainty over GDP deflator inflation dominates, real growth data may be a better
source.

14
Ongoing work using a structural dynamic model of the transmission mechanism
calibrated on UK data suggests that as price-volume data uncertainty increases,
monetary policymakers should place greater emphasis on nominal GDP growth data
and correspondingly less emphasis on the separate uncertain estimates of prices and
volume growth in interest-rate setting. But our calibrations indicate that estimates of
real growth can't be entirely disregarded, even when the data are very uncertain.
Interpreting levels revisions
We have seen that there can be large shifts in estimated real GDP levels following
revision and re-basing. Should this lead us to alter our view of the inflationary
outlook?
Walsh (2003) has used vintages of data for the level of real GDP for the United States
to calculate estimates of potential output and output gaps where potential output is
estimated using a Hodrick-Prescott filter. His results, reproduced in Chart 7, show that
estimates of the level of the output gap are subject to significant revision, by up to 4
per cent of potential output.
Chart 8 applies the same procedure to our UK data from 1989Q3 to 2004Q111.
Chart 7. Cumulative revisions to output gap Chart 8. Cumulative revisions to output gap
estimates (US)

estimates (UK)

Revisions to the level
of the output gap

Percentage points

Percentage points

Revisions to the level of
the output gap

4
3

4
3

2

2

1

1

0

0

-1

-1

-2

-2

-3
-4
1966

1972

1978

1984

1990

1996

2002

-3
1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

Source: Walsh (2003)

11

Although we have real and nominal GDP data from the mid-1950s onwards, which were used in our
estimates of potential output, in our dataset vintages of data are available only from 1989.

2003

15
Looking at these charts, we can see that if we were to take these estimates at face
value we would judge that data mismeasurement seems to affect the estimate of the
level of the output gap much more than it affects estimates of trend growth or real
growth. Table 3 compares the revision in the output gap level to the revision in real
growth rates, showing that both the mean and the standard deviation is much higher12.
This is of concern since output gap mismeasurement has played a significant role in
policy mistakes of the past.13

Table 3. Summary statistics on cumulative
revisions to UK output gap estimates
(1989Q3-2004Q1 vintages)

Output gap (level)*
Real GDP (quarterly
growth) *

Mean
revision

Mean
absolute
revision

Standard
deviation

0.31

1.21

1.55

0.13

0.27

0.35

*Percentage points

This analysis might suggest placing less emphasis on output gap estimates, and
correspondingly more on growth rate data. The suggestion that for practical data
measurement reasons we should place more emphasis on rates of change than levels
has some history. For example Federal Reserve Board Governor Edward Gramlich14
discussed whether, because of measurement error, policymakers should concentrate
more on the rate of change of real variables than their levels, within acceptable
margins, in judging how much inflationary pressure was building up in the
economy.15
But is this essentially mechanical approach to estimating the output gap sensible? Let
us suppose that following a re-basing the level of real GDP is much higher whilst the
CPI inflation data remains unchanged. Should our view of the output gap have

12

The addition of a new observation might result in a re-estimation of trend, even in the absence of
other revisions. The Hodrick-Prescott filter used here is particularly susceptible to a change in the endpoint, although all methods will suffer to some extent. We have looked at two additional methods of
estimating trend output (a simple and a split trend) and find that the standard deviation of revisions to
the output gap is little changed. Following Orphanides and Van Norden (2001) we find that a little
over half the standard deviation of revisions to the output gap using the Hodrick-Prescott filter is
attributable to changing the end-point, the remainder to revisions in the data.
13
See Nelson and Nikolov (2002).
14
Gramlich (1999).
15
There are separate theoretical arguments for why we should emphasise rates of change above levels.
For example the economy might be prone to inflationary bottlenecks whenever it grows too fast.

16
changed, or might the revisions suggest that the level of potential output is also much
higher than previously thought, such that the estimate of the output gap has not
changed? In other words, should news in the revision cause us to change our view of
the inflation outlook?
There are good reasons to be wary of estimates of output gap uncertainty derived from
mechanical approaches. In addition to the variability of GDP levels data, mechanical
estimates of the output gap are derived by assuming that potential output is either
fixed or is a smoothed trend in real GDP. Hence, by construction, the potential level
is unlikely to change as much as the real GDP level. This assumption may be
incorrect, indeed it is likely that potential output will vary in response to real changes
to, for example, investment, technology, demographics or preferences16.
Moreover, the mechanical method takes no account of other information such as
inflation data, the labour market or surveys of capacity utilisation, all of which the
MPC uses to inform its judgement as to the amount of spare capacity in the economy.
The mechanical approach also assumes that only aggregate real GDP data is relevant.
But disaggregate information on relative price movements might influence our view
of supply17. If we were to allow such additional information, we might find that our
best guess of potential output would shift along with our best measure of actual output
following a revision. Looking at disaggregate data would also mean acknowledging
that rebasing has given us access to potentially relevant new information.
In this respect it may be useful to look at the shifts in relative prices in ONS data and
consider what factors might have driven them. We have seen that a change in the
price-volume allocation of nominal investment growth was responsible for a large
part of the upward revision to GDP growth rates in the 2003 Blue Book. If we look at
the main expenditure components of GDP, we can see from chart 9 that the relative
price of investment, both whole economy and business, has trended downwards since
the early to mid 1980s.

16
17

This point is not new. See for example Woodford (2001), Nelson (2002).
See, for example, Whelan (2000, 2001).

17

Chart 9. Consumption, business investment and gross

Chart 10. Price of whole economy investment by asset

fixed capital formation deflators relative to the GDP

relative to the GDP deflator (1990Q1-2004Q1)

deflator (1966-2003)

Business investment
deflator/GDP deflator

1.8

1.8
1.6

1.6
1.4

GFCF deflator/GDP
deflator

Other machinery and
equipment

1.4

T ransport equipment
Dwellings

1.2

1

1
Consumption
deflator/GDP deflator

0.8

Other buildings and
structures

0.8

0.6
0.4

0.6
1966 1970 1974 1978 1982 1986 1990 1994 1998 2002

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

When we look at whole economy investment by asset, in Chart 10, we see that, at
least in the 1990s, the fall in relative price of whole economy investment seems to
have been driven by “other machinery and equipment”. This includes ICT goods,
which probably best illustrate the possibility of trend changes in relative prices18. As
the relative price has fallen, the volumes purchased of these goods have increased.
This could be an example of what economists have referred to as investment-specific
technological progress, related to improvements in the efficiency with which we can
generate productive equipment capital19. This would suggest that those goods that
have experienced falling relative prices are those that are capital-intensive in their
production and distribution.
Consumer durable goods that, once purchased, yield services over time, also tend to
be capital-intensive. And although the relative price of consumption as a whole has
not changed much over decades, as shown in Chart 9, within the broad categories of
household consumption there are substantial differences between consumer durable
and non-durable goods. Chart 11 shows that while the relative price of non-durables

18
19

1.2

See also, for example, Bakhshi, Oulton, and Thompson (2003) and Ellis and Groth (2003).
See Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell (1997).

2002

18
has been stable and that of services has trended upwards since 1980, the relative price
of both durables and semi-durables has fallen since the mid 1990s.
Chart 12 plots the relative prices of the three main components of durable
consumption. The downward trend in the relative prices has been due to a sharp
decline in the relative price of “recreation and culture” goods, which account for just
over 20% of all durable goods, and include such items as audio visual equipment and
information processing equipment.20
Chart 11. Prices of categories of households

Chart 12. Prices of categories of durables relative

consumption expenditure relative to the GDP

to the GDP deflator (1980Q1-2004Q1)

deflator (1980Q1-2004Q1)
6

2
Semi-durables

1.8

5

1.6
1.4

Durables

4

Recreation and culture

1.2
1

Non-durables

0.8

2

0.6

Services

0.4

1984

1988

1992

1996

2000

0
2004

1

T ransport

0.2
1980

3

Furnishing and
household goods

1980

1984

1988

1992

1996

It thus appears that those sectors that have experienced falling relative prices and
rising volumes are predominantly those with a higher rate of technical progress. Of
course there is an international dimension to this, as many of these goods are
purchased from abroad. But it could be consistent with “strong underlying
productivity growth that is difficult to discern in the data […] associated with
investment in ICT”21. This could be a factor which might have raised the rate of
growth of potential output, with implications for our assessment of the output gap.
Conclusion
We can rarely directly observe the economic concepts we might hope to measure.
Not only might the concepts not map easily into real world phenomena, but the real
20
21

See also Power (2004).
See Bank of England (2004).

2000

0
2004

19
world will often not lend itself to direct measurement and will have to be estimated.
Such estimates will be subject to revision as more information becomes available.
And at times a new methodology might help bridge the gap between the measurable
real world and the underlying concept, or enable improved estimation of the real
world phenomena.
Revisions to data stemming either from more information or methodological
improvements will inevitably lead us to reassess our view of the underlying truth. As
the prisoners in Plato’s cave found when the Guardian tried to enlighten them, this is
not always comfortable. But it is an inevitable part of the policy maker’s job, and that
of other users of statistics, to make sense of revisions. Improvements to statistics
should be something we welcome, not criticise.
I have argued that understanding the nature of data uncertainty and revisions should
inform our judgments about the world. In the presence of price–volume uncertainty
for example, we may find that measures of nominal values contain useful information,
which can supplement the imperfect estimates of real variables. Data on the level of
GDP appears more prone to mismeasurement than growth rates, and we should be
wary of conventional mechanical estimates of the output gap, which rely heavily on
levels information. I argue that we should not ignore other relevant information and
the relative price data used in the rebasing process may itself be informative.
We should remember that the true understanding in Plato’s cave comes not when the
one prisoner is forced blinking into the light and sees the true objects for the first
time, but when he goes back in to the cave and comprehends how the interaction of
the light, the objects and the wall of the cave produce the shadows, which is all that
those who are still captive can see.
Marian Bell

20

References
Akritidis, L. (2003), “Revisions to quarterly GDP growth and expenditure
components”, Economic Trends, December 2003.
Atkinson, A. (2004), “Atkinson Review: Interim Report Measurement of
Government Output and Productivity for the National Accounts” available at
http://www.statistics.gov.uk/about/methodology_by_theme/atkinson/downloads/atkin
son.pdf.
Bakhshi, H., Oulton, N., and J. Thompson (2003), “Modelling investment when
relative prices are trending: theory and evidence for the United Kingdom”, Bank of
England Working Paper, no 189.
Bank of England (2004), Inflation Report, August 2004.
Brackstone, G. (1999), “Managing data quality in a statistical agency”, Statistics
Canada Survey Methodology, available at
http://dsbb.imf.org/vgn/images/pdfs/scpap.pdf.
Castle, J. and C. Ellis (2002), “Building a real-time database for GDP(E)”, Bank of
England Quarterly Bulletin, Spring 2002.
Ellis, C. and C. Groth (2003), “Long-run equilibrium ratios of business investment
to output in the United Kingdom”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Summer
2003.
Gramlich, E.M. (1999), “Remarks by Governor Edward M. Gramlich before the
Wharton Public Policy Forum Series”, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, April 22, 1999.
Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and P. Krusell (1997), “Long-Run Implications of
Investment-Specific Technological Change”, American Economic Review, 87.
King, M.A. (2003), Speech at the East Midlands Development Agency/Bank of
England Dinner in Leicester on 14 October 2003.
Lynch, R. (1996), “Measuring real growth – index numbers and chain-linking”,
Economic Trends, June 1996.
Maitland-Smith, F. (2004), “Revisions to GDP planned for the 2004 Blue Book”,
Economic Trends, May 2004.
Nelson, E. (2002), “What does the UK’s monetary policy and inflation experience tell
us about the transmission mechanism?”, in L. Mahadeva and P. Sinclair (eds.),
Monetary Transmission in Diverse Economies, Cambridge University Press.
Nelson, E. and K. Nikolov (2002), Monetary policy and stagflation in the UK, Bank
of England Working Paper No. 155.

21

Orphanides, O. and S. Van Norden (2001), The Unreliability of Output Gap
Estimates in Real Time, Centre Interuniversitaire de Recherche en Analyse des
Organisations (CIRANO) Working Paper no. 2001s-57.
Power, J. (2004), Durable spending, relative prices and consumption, Bank of
England Quarterly Bulletin, Spring 2004.
Tuke, A. and G. Reed (2001), “The effects of annual chain-linking on the output
measure of GDP”, Economic Trends, October 2001.
Walsh, C.E. (2003), "Minding the speed limit," Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco Economic Letter, (May 30). Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
Whelan, K. (2000), "A guide to the use of chain aggregated NIPA data", Federal
Reserve Board Discussion Paper, June 2000.
Whelan, K. (2001), “A Two-Sector Approach to Modeling U.S. NIPA Data”, Federal
Reserve Board Discussion Paper, April 2001.
Woodford, M. (2001), Inflation Stabilization and Welfare, National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No 8071.
ENDS

