Monetary Policy-Making: Fact and Fiction
Speech given by
Richard Lambert, Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England

At a South West Agency Dinner in Bristol
24 May 2005

I am grateful to Alison Stuart and Michael Sawicki for help in preparing this speech. I have also
benefited from comments and discussions with many colleagues at the Bank. The views expressed
here are personal and should not be interpreted as those of the Bank of England or other members of
the Monetary Policy Committee
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Monetary policy-making: fact and fiction
This week marks the end of the second year of my three-year term as a member of the
Monetary Policy Committee. It seems like a good moment to reflect on what I have
learnt over that period about the process of setting monetary policy, and on how
things look from my perspective today.
As someone who is not a professional economist, there is no doubt that I did have a
great deal to learn. But my biggest single lesson has not been about abstruse theory or
econometric modelling. It’s been about something much more simple – something
which came as rather a surprise to someone from my background in newspapers.
It’s been about uncertainty.
In journalism, certainty is what matters. You generally need to express your views
with the absolute confidence that anyone who disagrees with you is a fool or a knave.
In monetary policy, exactly the opposite is true. It is critically important to recognise
the lack of certainty about all the key issues which have to be addressed. There are
some concepts to help clarify the mind about how things stand today, and how they
might look in a couple of years’ time. And there are some yardsticks against which to
judge the appropriateness of this or that course of action.
But few of them are directly measurable, or easily observable. Most of them are built
on assumptions which may simply be wrong, and on data which are subject to
revision. And all of them may be subject to different interpretations at different stages
of the economic cycle.
In other words, there are no set rules.
This uncertainty applies to even the most basic questions – such as: is the current rate
of interest accommodative – meaning is it low enough to encourage credit growth and
economic expansion? Or is it restrictive, in the sense that it is squeezing down on
animal spirits and cutting back demand?
2

The so-called neutral rate of interest is the level at which economic activity would
grow at a sustainable rate over time, while also keeping inflation under control. One
way of arriving at this magic number is to estimate the neutral real interest rate, and
add to that figure the inflation target to arrive at the appropriate nominal interest rate.
When I joined the Committee, there seemed to be a pretty solid consensus among
outside pundits that the neutral nominal rate stood somewhere around 5 to 5.5 per
cent. That view was based on the idea that the long term real rate was probably in the
region of 2.5 to 3 per cent, while the inflation target – then pinned on the RPIX
measure – was 2.5 per cent.
But the problem is that the neutral real rate is not a constant. Instead, it varies over
time, depending on a host of changing circumstances such as the rate of productivity
growth, fiscal policy and the rate of savings both at home and abroad. Moreover,
estimates of the average neutral rate will vary depending on what period of time is
taken into consideration. A crude proxy for the neutral real rate taken from indexlinked gilts (between five and ten years ahead) reached almost 6% in the late 1980s
but had fallen to under 4% ten years later (Chart 1).
More recently, the rate appears to have edged down further (to around 2.5%). There
are several possible explanations for this, including demographic change, investment
demand, international flows of savings, or more market specific factors. Since we
can’t be certain about the relative importance of these competing explanations, we
can’t be confident about where real rates might go from here. And this in turn means
it is impossible at any moment in time to pin down the neutral rate with the degree of
precision necessary to use it as a guide to each month’s decision.
It seemed easy enough when I joined the Committee two years ago: the Bank's repo
rate had been declining for three years and at 3.75 per cent was close to what turned
out to be the trough. That, it was clear to me, was an accommodative rate whichever
way it might be assessed.
But with rates now up at 4.75 per cent, the picture is much less clear. In nominal
terms, this is a modest figure by the standards of recent economic cycles. There seems
to be plenty of liquidity available in the corporate sector and although the growth in
secured borrowing by retail customers has slowed down a bit with lower house price
3

inflation and the fall in housing market transactions, demand for unsecured borrowing
remains strong (Chart 2).
Inflation as measured by the Consumer Price Index has risen more sharply than
expected from its low point last September, and not exclusively because of the impact
of higher oil prices (Chart 3). Producer output price inflation has picked up smartly in
the last three years (Chart 4). And there is reason to think that import prices will also
be pushing up on inflation over the next year or two. All this could suggest that
interest rates might need to rise a little further in order to ensure that inflation remains
low and stable over time. But other evidence points in a different direction.
Consumers seem to have become distinctly more cautious about their spending habits
in recent months. Growth in household consumption slowed sharply to just 0.2 per
cent in the final quarter of 2004, and gloomy news from the high street, from the car
saleroom, from surveys, and from the Bank’s regional Agents suggest that conditions
have not got much better so far this year.
It’s not clear precisely what’s behind the recent weakness of consumption considering
that employment growth has picked up a little, real incomes are in reasonable shape,
and the housing market appears to have stabilised. Against this background, it
certainly is not obvious to me that interest rates are currently set too low to ensure low
and stable inflation in the years to come.
This view is reinforced by the latest numbers from the manufacturing sector, which
have been surprisingly weak.
Of course there are other tools you can deploy to help form a judgment about where
interest rates should stand. One much-used example is the Taylor rule, under which
interest rates are raised or lowered according to whether current output is above or
below trend, and current inflation is above or below the target. But this rule is
backward looking and does not take into account other information that might be
pertinent to the outlook for inflation. It also requires an assessment of the neutral real
interest rate and an assessment of spare capacity. So once again, such rules can help
to clarify thinking, but do not provide a precise guide to the appropriate interest rate.

4

Depending on how the different variables are assessed, the Taylor rule would point at
present to an interest rate somewhat below the current level (Chart 5).
In this example, one big uncertainty is about the level of spare capacity in the
economy – an issue which I’ve spent many happy hours discussing over the past two
years.
Setting a course for monetary policy requires some assessment to be made about the
pressure of aggregate demand relative to the economy’s productive potential. If there
appears to be quite a bit of capacity left to be filled before bottlenecks start to appear,
interest rates may be kept lower than otherwise would have been the case without
leading to a build up of inflation.
For example, growth in the American economy has been above its long run average
for much of the last year or so. But there has been enough spare capacity in the
system to permit the Fed to raise interest rates at a measured pace from their
historically low levels.
The percentage difference between the level of GDP consistent with the sustainable
full employment of resources and the current level of real GDP is described as the
output gap. I’ve learnt that this is another important but extremely slippery concept.
One way of demonstrating this slipperiness is to look at current estimates of the
output gap in the UK (Chart 6). On the Treasury’s version, the economy is running
comfortably below its productive potential, with noticeably more spare capacity than
was available in the late 1990s. No obvious reason to worry about inflationary
bottlenecks here.
But according to the OECD’s Economic Outlook, which is published today, the
opposite is true: the economy is already operating close to, or slightly above, capacity
and capacity constraints are a little higher than was the case through most of the
1990s.
The National Institute of Economic and Social Research, in its latest analysis
published last month, also suggests that relatively strong growth in the recent past
5

means that the output gap has now closed. Although capacity constraints are not
expected to be as tight as they were around 2000-01, the National Institute says that
further expansion in the coming months will bring “some signs of emerging
inflationary pressures”.
To be fair, the three institutions draw up their numbers on a different basis, which
means they are not directly comparable. But the challenges for monetary
policymakers are obvious. Estimates about the level of spare capacity have to be
constantly adjusted as new evidence comes in. And quite small changes in these
assumptions can lead to quite sizeable changes in estimates of the future levels of
price inflation.
Big mistakes here can lead to big trouble. An estimate by Bank of England
economists a few years ago suggested that monetary policy errors due to output gap
mis-measurement contributed between 3 and 7 percentage points to average UK
inflation in the 1970s, and between 1 and 6 percentage points in the 1980s.1
Rather than concentrating simply on a single measure of the output gap, the MPC
likes to look more broadly at the balance between supply and demand in both the
product and the labour markets. Here again, it is impossible to draw precise
conclusions. But helpful ways of thinking about the challenge were contained in the
Bank’s last two Inflation Reports, for February and for May. An article in the
February report took a look at factor utilisation in the private sector: how hard private
sector companies are using their capital and labour. This examined a number of
measures of productivity and the intensity with which companies were using capital
and labour, and compared the results with the surveys of capacity utilisation produced
by the CBI and the British Chambers of Commerce.
The conclusion was that companies taken in aggregate did appear to be working at or
above their normal levels of capacity. This is consistent with reports from the Bank’s
regional Agents, and with what many companies themselves are saying. And if it were
to be sustained over time, it would eventually push up on the pace of consumer price
inflation.
1

Nelson, E and Nikolov, K (2002), ‘UK inflation in the 1970s and 1980s: the role of output gap
mismeasurement’, Bank of England Working Paper 148.

6

Factor utilisation is one aspect of the balance between the demand for private sector
output and the resources required to produce it. The other is the tightness of the labour
market, which is the subject of an article in this month’s Inflation Report. The degree
of labour market tightness depends on the extent to which demand for labour is
matched by the potential supply of workers who are able and willing to take on jobs.
If companies find it difficult to hire and retain people, there is likely to be upward
pressure on their wage costs which they may seek to pass on by pushing up the selling
price of their goods and services.
Before I joined the Committee, I’d read many pundits who agreed that the MPC got
very uncomfortable when the annual rate of wage increases exceeded 4.5 per cent.
This view, I discovered, stemmed from comments in Inflation Reports back in the late
1990s to the effect that - given the UK’s historic levels of productivity growth of
roughly 2 per cent a year and the then inflation target of 2.5 per cent - it would indeed
be something to worry about if average earnings grew by much more than this figure
over a sustained period without clear signs of an improvement in underlying
productivity growth.
But alas, this too was yet another number which did not turn out to be very helpful
when thinking about the appropriate level for interest rates. For one thing, the MPC
has a symmetric target: it has to be just as worried about inflation turning out to be too
low as is about inflation being too high. On this reading, therefore, it should also get
uncomfortable if average earnings rose by much less than this figure for a prolonged
period, which of course has been the case for much of the past few years.
For another, the MPC is not in the “stop-go” business: it does not wait until a
particular data series passes a particular spot and then slam on the brakes. Much better
to study the trends, exploring whether changes are temporary or structural, and –
when appropriate – lean against them gradually, rather than waiting to do anything
until the last minute.
Finally and most important, the Committee does not form its views about the labour
market simply on estimates of the growth of average earnings. Rather it bases its
judgments on a view of the overall tightness of the labour market, which means

7

looking at movements in supply and demand as well as in wages. As with everything
else, no single piece of evidence is decisive.
One big question here is about the equilibrium unemployment rate, that is the level of
unemployment consistent with stable inflation. If this figure could be assessed with
any degree of precision, it would provide a much better view of capacity constraints in
the labour market at any given moment than otherwise would be the case.
But once again this is a moving target. Four years ago, Committee member Steve
Nickell and his co-author Glenda Quintini showed how, on one measure, the
equilibrium unemployment rate in the UK had fallen from nearly 10 per cent in the
late 1980s to under 6 per cent by the late 1990s – the result among other things of the
reduction in the power of trade unions, along with changes in benefits and
employment taxes, and in product market competition.2
It’s a fair bet that the equilibrium unemployment rate has fallen further in recent
years, helping to explain why wage inflation has remained relatively subdued despite
rising levels of employment.
The article on labour market tightness in the latest Inflation Report looks at a range of
indicators and business surveys and suggests that conditions have not got tighter over
the past 12 months: it may be the case that they have slackened a little. One possible
explanation is that the relative strength of the UK economy has pulled in more
workers from overseas. Indeed, it may be the case that old ideas about equilibrium
unemployment and the output gap may have to be rethought in a world of free
movement of labour across much of the European Union.
On this view of factor utilisation and the labour market, the overall economy may be
running somewhere around – but not much above – its productive potential. That
could point to some inflationary pressure in the economy but would not suggest that
things are getting out of hand.

2

Nickell, S and Quintini, G (2002), ‘The recent performance of the UK Labour Market’, Oxford
Review of Economic Policy, 18/2.

8

In its efforts to understand the data, the Committee spends a lot of time trying to sort
out the news from the noise – in other words, aiming off for statistical aberrations or
for data that past experience shows are particularly subject to revision. I will mention
two current examples.
One concerns the long term decline in the average hours worked across the UK
economy, a pattern which stretches back over decades and which has been particularly
marked over the past ten years. This appears to have been driven in good measure by
structural changes, such as increased demand for flexible working as female
participation in the workforce has risen, and a general tendency to reduce working
hours as society gets more prosperous. More recently measures such as the Working
Time Regulations are likely to have reduced average working hours yet further. If the
fall in average hours is indeed the result of structural changes, then the implication
would be that the level may have been permanently reduced.
In the past few months, however, the average for all workers has crept up a little to
32.2 hours a week. This modest looking increase, if it’s really happening, would add
up to a measurable increase in the supply of available labour. On one interpretation,
that might help to take the heat out of wage inflation, if it were permanent. On
another, it might suggest that businesses were finding it difficult to recruit new
employees to cope with increased demand, and so could presage some pick up in
wages and inflationary pressures.
Yet there are reasons for thinking the latest numbers may represent some kind of
measurement error: for one thing, a measure of usual hours worked has not risen to
the same extent (Chart 7). For the time being, then, put this one down to noise more
than news.
A different example: I’ve already mentioned the view that the growth in household
consumption – which played a vital part in the overall economic expansion of the past
decade – is slackening. But past experience shows that initial readings of consumption
– such as the official data for the final quarter of 2004 – are subject to quite sizeable
revisions. There have been times – such as in the summer of 1998 – when what at first
looked like a marked slowdown was subsequently largely revised away. And on other

9

occasions, such as the second quarter of 2003, consumption rapidly bounced back
after a weak first quarter.
This time, though, the tales of gloom from the high street, and from some other
consumer sectors, are too consistent to suggest that what we have seen so far is just a
statistical aberration. The picture is far from clear, since retail sales represent a little
less than two-fifths of household consumption. But in this case, it seems to me, there
may be more news than noise in the latest readings.
Another challenge, I’ve learnt, is that data can be highly volatile. One example:
through most of the first half of 2004, inflation as measured by the Consumer Price
Index was coming in noticeably below the MPC’s central expectation. The CPI, as
you remember, had replaced the RPIX measure as the official target from December
2003.
By the late summer, the rate was running at not much more than 1 per cent, and since
the CPI had not reached 2 per cent for around 7 years, I confess that I was beginning
to worry that the path back up to the new 2 per cent target could turn out to be
improbably steep.
The central projection in last August’s Inflation Report was that the target would be
reached in the summer of 2006. As it turned out, though, it took little more than six
months for the CPI to rise to its current rate of 1.9 per cent, and on our latest central
projection we will reach the 2 per cent mark in the very near future.
This is not in itself a cause for alarm. The MPC is set a symmetric inflation target,
which means that over time the rate of inflation will inevitably run above as well as
below the target.
It is true that the past decade has seen a period of unusual stability in the UK
economy, with output growing steadily and inflation remaining low and stable. But
the next few years may well be more challenging.
There is no longer a sufficient margin of spare capacity to offset unexpected price
increases, and we cannot expect import prices to keep dragging down on inflation in
10

the way that they have done in recent years. So when the economy is hit by a shock,
such as the steep rise in oil prices, we may have to get used to a world where the
relationship between output and inflation changes, and looks less benign. And
where, for a period, output slows below trend but inflation rises a little above target as
cost pressures feed through the supply chain.
So monetary policy is a process in which there are no set rules, where most of the data
are subject to revision, and where trend lines can shift with surprising speed. Does
this mean that decisions about monetary policy are entirely a matter for the
Committee’s discretion, and that its members are permanently blundering around in
the fog?
The answer to both questions is, of course, a resounding “no”.
The Committee does not have endless room for discretion: to the contrary, it is subject
to the overriding and ever-present requirement of its statutory mandate – to maintain
price stability as defined in the inflation target and, subject to that, to support the
Government’s objectives for growth and employment. This is the sole objective at
which policy is directed, and against which the Committee’s performance must be
assessed. It imposes a powerful discipline on our monthly meetings and keeps our
attention permanently focused on the key issues. The quarterly forecast round and
publication of the Inflation Report also discipline the Committee to consider how the
economic jigsaw fits together. Discussions are aided by the Bank’s quarterly
forecasting model which provides a coherent and consistent framework for thinking
about the way the economy functions. And the Committee also spends a long time
considering alternative models and the uncertainties and risks surrounding particular
forecasting judgments.
As for ways of coping with the uncertainties I have described, I would like to mention
six that I have found important over the past two years.
1)

Consider as wide a range of information inputs as possible, but be aware that
some are worth a lot more than others. Beware of anecdote and gossip. One of
the things that surprised me as a newcomer to the Bank was the sheer strength
and professionalism of its economic analysis – an extraordinary resource,
11

which among other things helps the Committee to understand what bits of data
are more reliable than others, how to use the business surveys to supplement
official data, and how to make intelligent guesses about underlying economic
trends. I’d been in and out of the Bank many times over the years, but I had
not appreciated quite how strong it has become in this respect.
2)

Don’t get too carried away by the latest data – there’s a temptation to do so,
given the regular programme of monthly MPC meetings and the constant
stream of economic news from around the world. The fact that, say, US non
farm payrolls may turn out a shade higher or lower in a single month than the
markets expected may make an interesting headline, but is not by itself going
to do much to change the UK outlook.

3)

Instead, concentrate on the big picture and on the issues which would lead to
trouble if the Committee got them badly wrong. The quarterly Inflation
Report round, which takes the form of a whole series of lengthy Committee
meetings, provides a wonderful opportunity to clarify the mind. And the
monthly meetings, focusing on the outlook for future inflation, provide a
regular check on whether the economy is moving along the expected lines.
Forecasting errors can be corrected, and judgments adjusted accordingly.

4)

Forecasts of economic growth and inflation are not to be translated into policy
in a mechanical way and Committee members do have to be ready to exercise
their judgment. February’s Inflation Report, on the central projection, had the
CPI rising at 2.2 per cent after year two and by 2.3 per cent at year three.
Since the Committee’s view was that the economy was rising at close to its
trend rate and operating at or a little above its potential capacity, this, on the
face of it, could have been a reason for pushing interest rates higher at that
time. But the Committee always looks carefully at the risks surrounding the
forecast. In February it concluded that the risks to both growth and inflation
were somewhat on the downside, thanks – among things – to uncertainty about
the outlook for consumer spending and the prospects for the global economy.
This, for most members, was reason enough to leave the rate unchanged at that
and subsequent meetings.

12

5)

The structure and make-up of the Committee is itself an invaluable aid to
sound decision making. A small group of people with a diverse set of
experiences but a single objective can challenge each other’s assumptions and
learn from their mistakes. There is enough continuity on the MPC to provide a
collective memory of how problems were tackled on similar occasions in the
past, and enough fresh thinking to bring new ideas to bear. Studies in both the
US and the UK suggest that groups of people who are prepared to debate with
and learn from each other are capable of producing better results than their
smartest individual member, and my experience of the past two years has
convinced me of why this is the case.3

6)

Finally, the trend in inflation expectations is a matter of critical importance to
the Committee. Here again there are no precise observations. Readings differ a
little depending on whether they are extrapolated from the financial markets or
from surveys, and expectations cannot themselves be targeted. Instead, they
are shaped by the extent to which the conduct of monetary policy is seen to be
credible. But so long as expectations remain as they are, anchored firmly
around the target, that makes the job of the Committee – to meet its mandate
of low and stable inflation – much more manageable (Chart 8).

For a good part of my time on the MPC, the decision making process seemed rather
straightforward. By the late autumn of 2003, it was clear that the economy was
picking up steam and that interest rates, at a 50-year low of 3.5 per cent, were heading
higher. The only real question was about how rapid the increases should be, and since
we had made it plain that we favoured a gradual approach to rate increases, there
wasn’t even much room for argument about that.
More recently, though, the task has become more challenging. It’s true that the
central projections in our latest Inflation Report, for May, look remarkably benign: the
economy growing around trend, inflation pretty well bang on target for most of the
next three years, market expectations of interest rates moving sideways at around their

3

Blinder, A S and Morgan, J (2000), ‘Are two heads better than one: an experimental analysis
of group vs individual decision making’, NBER Working Paper, No. 7909, September; Lombardelli, C,
Proudman, J and Talbot, J (2002), ‘Committees versus individuals: an experimental analysis of
monetary policy decision-making’, Bank of England Working Paper 165.

13

current level for years to come. The weakness in consumption turns out to be
temporary, and the recent upswing in Consumer Price Inflation is not sustained.
But that may turn out to be too rosy a view. I’ve already mentioned the question
marks over consumption, which represents over three-fifths of GDP. Government
spending, representing around a fifth of GDP, is no longer accelerating. And the US
news is a little less buoyant than it was a few months ago, while the euro zone
remains sluggish.
At the same time, there are a few signs that inflationary pressures may be building a
little around the world, and not just as a result of higher oil prices. After falling for
much of the past six years, the Consumer Price Index for goods moved up to around
zero in March and April, while that for services has edged up to 4 per cent. Pressures
from the supply chain may continue, and import prices may start to edge higher.
So my third year on the Committee may turn out to be even more interesting and
challenging than the first two. I look forward to it with enormous enthusiasm.

14

Monetary policy-making: fact and fiction
Chart 1

Chart 2

Forward real interest rates between
5 and 10 years ahead

Per cent
7.0

Annual growth in secured and unsecured
Per cent
lending

6.0

18

20
16

5.0

Average 1985-1997

14

Unsecured

12

4.0
Average since 1997

10

3.0

8

Secured

6

2.0

1985

1990

1995

2000

4

1.0

2

0.0

0
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005

2005

Note: calculated as the average index-linked yield on government
bonds in five to ten years' time, adjusted by the average difference
between CPI and RPI inflation since 1989.

Chart 3

Chart 4

Contributions to increase in CPI
inflation since September 2004

Percentage points

Transport services
Utilities
Food
Petrol
Other

Producer output price inflation

0.8

Per cent
6

0.7

5

0.6

4

0.5
0.4

3

Headline

0.3

2

0.2

1

0.1

0

0.0

Excluding petroleum
products

-0.1
Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec
2004

Jan
2005

Feb

Mar

-1
-2

Apr
1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

Chart 5

Chart 6

Official rate and rate implied by
Taylor rule

Per cent
8

Actual repo rate
(quarterly averages)

Output gap estimates

Per cent of GDP
2

7

1

6

0
-1

NIESR

5

OECD

-2

HMT

4

T aylor rule

-3

3
1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

Note: T he equilibrium real interest rate assumed for the T aylor rule
is the HP-filtered trend of the 5-year real forward rate 5 years out,
adjusted upwards to reflect the average difference between CPI and
RPI inflation. Weights on the output gap and deviations of inflation
from target are both equal to 0.5. Output gap is the deviation of real
GDP from HP-filtered trend over period 1955Q1 to 2005Q1.

Chart 7

-4
91 92 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04

Chart 8

Whole-economy average hours worked
Hours per week
38.0

Inflation expectations

Per cent

Hours per week
33.5

6
Bank independence

37.5

Actual hours (rhs)

Usual hours (lhs)

5

33
Market-implied (5-10 year, RPI)(a)

4

32.5

37.0

3

36.5

32
Survey-based (1-2 year, RPI/RPIX)(b)

36.0
1994

31.5
1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2
1

Sep-92

Sep-94

Sep-96

Sep-98

Sep-00

Sep-02

Sep-04

(a) T he difference between five-year forward, five-year yields on
conventional and index-linked gilts
(b) Consensus Economics survey expectations for 1 to 2 years ahead
Note: RPI is the measure of inflation used for index-linked bonds, but
is not the target measure of inflation in the UK. RPI will differ from
both RPIX and CPI, which partly reflects the coverage of the index:
for example, RPI includes mortgage interest payments. In addition,
RPI will typically be higher than CPI due to a formula effect, as the
arithmetic mean rather than the geometric mean is used to aggregate
individual prices within each expenditure category.

