Monetary Challenges in a New Economy
Speech given by
Dr Sushil Wadhwani, Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England

At the HSBC Global Investment Seminar
12 October 2000

I am greatly indebted to Nick Davey, Jennifer Greenslade, John Henderson and Nick Oulton for their
considerable help and advice on this speech. I am also grateful to Bill Allen, Charlie Bean, Roger
Clews, Joanne Cutler, Neal Hatch, Chris Kelly (HMT), John Kidgell (ONS), Robin Lynch (ONS), Nigel
Jenkinson, DeAnne Julius, Ian Plenderleith, Clifford Smout and John Whitley for their helpful
comments on an earlier draft. Of course, all the views expressed here are entirely personal and do
not necessarily reflect the views of either the Monetary Policy Committee or the Bank of
England.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1.

Is The UK Economy “New”?

The main reason for believing that the UK economy might be behaving differently is
that economic forecasters have, on average, significantly under-predicted GDP growth
while simultaneously over-predicting inflation since 1992. One plausible explanation
for this phenomenon is that some of the underlying structural relationships have
changed.

2.

An Intensification of Product Market Competition?

The improvement in the growth-inflation trade-off might have occurred because
globalisation, deregulation and, more recently, internet price comparisons might have
increased perceived competitive pressure. Survey evidence is supportive of the notion
that the degree of product market competition has intensified, and I report on
preliminary econometric work which suggests that inflation forecasts in the 1990s
would have been more accurate if they had incorporated such survey responses. This
provides some support for the view embodied in the MPC’s central projection that a
continuing intensification of competitive pressure is likely to depress inflation over
the next two years.

3.

Changes in the UK Labour Market

Changes in the unemployment benefits regime and union power have also probably
contributed to the improvement in the growth-inflation trade-off in the UK during the
last decade.

4.

Measurement Issues

It is possible that measurement issues have led forecasters to under-estimate the
supply potential of the UK economy. For example, a preliminary set of estimates of
the flow of capital services to industry has shown twice the growth that has been seen
in a conventional measure of change in net capital stock derived from official
2

estimates of wealth.1

The use of the capital services measure could give a

significantly higher growth rate of potential output.

To take another example, if one makes alternative assumptions about the
classification of software spending and also substituted US-style price indices for
computers and software, then, preliminary, illustrative calculations suggest that GDP
growth might have been underestimated by as much as 0.4 percentage points per
annum over the period 1994-98. Importantly, the size of the potential bias in the
estimate of GDP growth has been growing over time, which is likely to lead to biases
in estimates of indicators of inflationary pressure like the output gap. The ONS is
working closely with the Bank to continue progress in the area of capital stock
measures, and the issue of quality adjustment of computer prices was addressed in the
recent Quality Review of Short Term Indicators of Output released by the ONS.

5.

Prospects for Productivity Growth

Personally, I believe that it is likely that productivity growth is likely to be above
average over the next 2 years, primarily because of the likely response of firms to
intensified product market competition, the beneficial effects of B2B e-commerce,
and the fact that the payoff from the significant amount of Information and
Communications Technology investment that has occurred is due soon. To ‘wait and
see’ for a statistically significant change in the actual, measured productivity growth
might be to miss an economically significant change in the true productivity growth
rate.

6.

Keeping One’s Sense of Perspective

Although it is easy to be excited by the structural changes that are happening, it is
important to emphasise that while the “New Economy” considerations discussed
above have important disinflationary effects, they do not imply the death of inflation.
It therefore remains important to continue to monitor a variety of wholly conventional
influences on inflation when setting policy. It is, for example, important that the
recent rise in oil prices does not lead to an increase in inflation expectations.
1

The net capital stock is obtained by weighting each component of capital by its asset price, while the
capital services measure uses the relative contributions to output as weights.
3

1 INTRODUCTION
There has, in recent years, been much discussion of the ‘New Economy’ (NE
hereafter). There is no generally accepted definition of what one means by the NE.2
There are those who see the NE as being synonymous with an acceleration in the
diffusion of Information and Communications Technology (ICT, hereafter – see, eg
Gordon (2000)).

However, I regard that as a rather narrow definition, since much

that might be different about the economy today relates one not just to ICT advances,
but also to the effects of globalisation, intensifying product market competition,
greater labour market flexibility and several other factors.

A more appropriate characterisation of how a central banker might define the NE is,
perhaps, that provided by Chairman Greenspan.

“ … it is certainly true that we have a new economy.

It is different.

It is

behaving differently and it requires a different type of monetary policy to
maintain its stability and growth than we had in the past.”

(Testimony before Senate Banking Committee, February 23, 2000.)

I shall, therefore, turn to a discussion of what might be different about how the UK
economy operates now, as compared to, say, how it behaved in the seventies or
eighties.

2 IS THE UK ECONOMY DIFFERENT NOW?
THE RECENT FORECASTING RECORD
One reason for thinking that the UK economy might be behaving differently is to look
at the evidence suggesting that economic forecasters have been persistently too
gloomy about the UK economy since the departure from the ERM.
Table 1 displays the average forecast errors that have been made over this period.3
Focussing on the average of all forecasts (ie the ‘consensus’), notice that, on average,

2

See Browne (2000) for an extensive discussion of this issue.
These numbers are based on preliminary work by Nick Davey and Jennifer Greenslade of the External
MPC Unit at the Bank of England.
3

4

GDP growth has been underestimated by about 0.5% pa, which is a large error in
relation to the actual average growth rate of around 2.9%.

TABLE 1
AVERAGE FORECAST ERRORS1 IN THE UK, 1993-99
FORECASTER

AVERAGE3
ERROR

SIGNIFICANT4
AT 10% LEVEL

+0.48%

YES

-0.53%

YES

GDP GROWTH FORECAST
CONSENSUS2

INFLATION (RPIX) FORECAST
CONSENSUS2

1

Four quarter-ahead forecast errors.

2

Consensus forecasts taken from ‘Consensus Economics’.

3

Sample period: 1993 I – 1999 IV.

4

Using a t-test over this sample period.

Now, a conventional view (that is found in text books and minutes of central bank
meetings alike) holds that if GDP growth were faster than expected over a sustained
period of time, then,4 on average, actual inflation must also be higher than expected.
However, the actual inflation out-turn over this period was, on average, 0.5% lower
than the ‘consensus’ inflation forecast.

Hence, economic forecasters appear to have

been simultaneously too gloomy about, both, GDP growth and inflation.

I should

say, in passing, that virtually all forecasters (including the Bank of England) failed to
spot the improvement in the growth-inflation trade-off during the 1990s. There are a
variety of possible explanations for this phenomenon. One class of hypotheses would
envisage a significant change in the structural relationships that underlie the
forecasting processes. I discuss some of these hypotheses next, as policymakers must
always be alive to the possibility that historical relationships might be breaking down.

2.2 AN INTENSIFICATION OF PRODUCT MARKET COMPETITION?

5

A commonly cited reason for why the economy might be behaving differently is that
the degree of product market competition has intensified over the last few years.

A

contributory factor may be globalisation, ie the increasing integration of global
product markets.

(Figure 1 suggests a striking increase in the degree of import

penetration in the UK, with the rate of increase having accelerated in recent years).

Figure 1

Import penetration
(% of GDP)

40

30

20

10

Q165

Q170

Q175

Q180

Q185

Q190

Q195

0
Q100

Evidence of increased product market competition has not just been confined to
globalisation.

Government action has also played a role here.

Privatisation and/or

regulatory changes in a whole host of industries including gas, water, telecom,
electricity, airports, rail, the docks and broadcasting have led to rather more
competitive product market conditions.

Of course, the intensification of competition does not appear to have been confined
just to the internationally traded or deregulated sectors – in a conjunctural context we
continue to hear much about the ‘price wars’ in retailing as well.
Figure 2 shows that, within the retailing sector, the CBI Distributive Trades Survey
suggests that the perceived ability to increase prices, at a given level of demand, is
lower than it used to be.

Notice that while reported volumes recovered after their

Autumn 1998 slowing, pressure on pricing has continued to intensify. Currently, the
response to the price question is at a record low even though the survey balance for
volumes is above average. It appears that, in a low and stable inflation environment,
4

Conditional on potential output growth having remained unchanged.
6

consumers have become more discriminating buyers, as they are better able to
distinguish between relative and absolute changes.

More recently, foreign entrants

into the UK retail market, internet price comparisons and investigations into allegedly
uncompetitive practices might have played some role.
Figure 2

CBI Prices and Volumes
Survey Balance

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30

94

95

96

97

98

99

2000

CBI dist trade retail prices (current)
CBI dist trades reported retail volume (3mth av)

A crude proxy for the extent of perceived competitive pressure is to rely on survey
evidence.

The Euler Trade Industry Indemnity survey (which spans all the broad

industry sectors) has asked questions relating to the extent to which price discounting
and the competitive environment have been perceived as impacting on profitability
since 1994. Figure 3 displays the responses. Note that a response below 50 suggests
that the factor is having a negative impact on profitability. The responses appear to
point to an intensification of perceived competitive pressures and the extent of
discounting over this period, (dating back to around mid-1997), as they have fallen
further below 50, suggesting a greater negative impact on profitability.
Figure 3

7

EULER Survey measures of pricing
pressures

Balance

Price discounting

Decreased
profitability

50
45
40
35
30

Competitive environment
25
20
94

95

96

97

98

99

2000

It is sometimes asserted that an intensification of competition is a one-off event and
must, therefore, only have a transient effect on inflation. Consequently, the argument
goes, it should not affect one’s perception of the medium-term outlook for inflation.

As my ex-colleague, Willem Buiter (2000) has recently emphasised again, inflation is,
ultimately, a monetary phenomenon.

A fall in the NAIRU that was associated with

intensified product market competition would not, therefore, reduce inflation in the
long-run, though there would be important short-run effects.

Specifically, suppose that we start in a position where inflation is running at 2½% and
would, on unchanged interest rates, remain constant thereafter. Now, assume that the
NAIRU falls because of intensified product market competition, then, other things
being equal, inflation out-turns will start coming in below target. A central bank that,
like the Bank of England (BoE hereafter), has a symmetric inflation target will
respond to the expected below target inflation by lowering interest rates.

However,

over time, the actual unemployment rate should drift down to the new, lower level of
the NAIRU. When that happens one would expect interest rates and inflation to rise
back to their original level.

Hence, in the short-run, the benign structural factors should enable inflation to come
in lower than before.

I should say that the “short-run” in this example could, in

practice, last several years, as structural factors that lower the NAIRU can, sometimes
improve gradually over a number of years. Indeed, Figure 3 suggests that, until now,

8

the perceived intensification of competitive pressure has been a relatively long-lasting
phenomenon (has already gone on for over 3 years), and could, therefore, have
legitimately been taken into account by policymakers.

Importantly, preliminary work by Nick Davey and Jennifer Greenslade of the External
MPC Unit (at the Bank of England) suggests that during the 1990s, a regression of
actual RPIX out-turns on RPIX forecasts (4 quarters ago) and the Euler survey
responses (also 4 quarters ago) results in a statistically significant coefficient on the
survey measure of competitive pressure (Table 2). The evidence suggests that the
Euler survey responses contain incremental predictive power relative to the
‘consensus’RPIX forecasts (or, indeed, the NIESR or Bank of England forecasts) (see
Table 2), ie it is possible that the tendency to over-predict inflation is related to not
paying enough attention to the possibility that the intensification of product market
pressure has been altering some of the relationships built into existing macroeconometric models.5

TABLE 2
INCREMENTAL PREDICTIVE POWER OF EULER SURVEY RESPONSES
FOR RPIX OUTTURNS (ONE YEAR AHEAD)1,2
FORECAST INCLUDED

EULER SURVEY RESPONSE
COEFFICIENT

t- RATIO 3

CONSENSUS ECONOMICS

0.05

2.1

NIESR4

0.06

3.3

Notes:
1

Sample period is 1995 Q1 – 2000 Q2.

2

Regression run is Actual RPIX out-turns on a constant term, the relevant forecast
(four quarters ago), and the Euler survey response (four quarters ago).

3

t-ratios are based on Newey-West standard errors.

4

NIESR denotes the National Institute of Economic and Social Research

5

It is plausible to believe that some of the over-prediction of inflation might be explained by exchange
rate forecasting errors over the post-1997 periods. However, Davey-Greenslade included actual
exchange rate forecasting errors or the Euler survey question on exchange rates within this regression.
However, the basic result that the survey measures of prices discounting and a competitive
environment help to explain the inflation forecast errors was intact.
9

There is also some direct support for the notion of a change in the underlying
structural relationship linking retail goods prices to its underlying determinants.
Some preliminary econometric work at the External MPC unit at the Bank of England
has found that a conventional equation6 which could explain the behaviour of retail
goods prices reasonably well until early 1998, has broken down since with actual
outturns significantly lower than fitted values.

Of course, as with any econometric

exercise, alternative explanations might be offered, but the hypothesis of a structural
change in margins is quite compelling as it accords with anecdotal and survey
evidence.

Note that, since the November 1999 Inflation Report, the MPC has in fact,
incorporated a ‘structural’ compression of price-cost margins within the central
projection, which, of course, is consistent with some of the evidence discussed above.
The assumption that we made was a judgement that was necessarily based on a host of
different considerations, mainly of a forward-looking nature.

It, is, though, notable

that, perhaps, our behaviour can also be justified by the observed correlation between
actual forecast errors and survey-based measures of the intensity of product market
competition that emerges from the Davey-Greenslade work (Table 2).

If one were, however, sceptical of the view that an intensification of product market
competition has been an important factor, one might point to the fact that the profit
share of nominal GDP for the UK is around its post-1980 average (see Figure 4),
which does not, at first sight, point to a significant squeeze in margins. Although the
profit share has fallen back in recent years (which would be consistent with a
compression of margins), the level of the profit share is broadly unchanged since
1992, which is around when the trade-off between inflation and GDP growth appears
to have altered.

Moreover, the profit-share of GDP in the US is also, if anything,

slightly above its post-1980 average (see Figure 4).
Figure 4

6

In a regression of retail goods prices on the exchange rate, oil and commodity prices, unit labour
costs, foreign export prices, a time trend and retail sales. The work was carried out by Nick Davey.
10

Measure of Profit Share of GDP (a)
Per cent

48
46

UK

44
42
40

US
US average since 1980

38
UK average since 1980
36
1980

82

84

86

88

90

92

94

96

98

00

(a) Measured as that share of income not taken by labour.

However, it is important to recognise that an intensification of competitive pressure
would only be associated with an actual fall of observed profit margins if everything
else remains unchanged.7 Specifically, if, for example there was a technology-driven
rise in productivity growth, and the real wages of workers did not initially rise in line
with the increase in productivity (which is an historical regularity), then, we might
nevertheless observe a rise in the profit share. This may help explain why the profit
share in the US has not fallen in the 1990s.

Alternatively, if the power of labour were diminishing (say, because of a fall in union
power), then, this would, of itself, be associated with a rise in the profit share. Of
course, a simultaneous intensification of product market competition would put
downward pressure on the profit share. As to what happens to the actual observed
profit margin depends on which of these two factors predominates.

As I shall remind you below, there is much that has happened in the UK labour
market to strengthen the relative bargaining position of firms vis-à-vis workers.
Consequently, I am quite content to believe than an intensification of competitive
pressure has occurred even though the profit share has been broadly stable.

2.3 CHANGES IN THE LABOUR MARKET
I have previously discussed the far-reaching changes that have occurred in the UK
labour market over the last two decades (see Wadhwani (2000a)), so I will not have
much to say on that topic today. However, Table 3 reminds us that, along a variety of

11

dimensions, a great deal is different today (cf. 1998 vs 1980).

Union membership

and strike activity are much lower. Imbalances in the pattern of labour demand and
supply have diminished significantly. Turning to the unemployment benefits regime,
the conventional replacement ratio (ie the ratio of out-of-work benefit to estimated inwork income) has fallen.

Further, the New Deal, and other measures which have

tightened the availability of benefits have also probably been influential.

It is notable that if one takes the wage equation that is to be found in the Bank of
England’s core macro-econometric model (see Bank of England (1999)), then, there is
evidence that it has over-predicted wage growth in recent years (ie since around
1992).

TABLE 3
SOME KEY FEATURES OF THE LABOUR MARKET (1998 VS 1980)

FACTORS

1998

1992

1980

UNION DENSITY

0.30

0.36

0.49

NUMBER OF WORKING DAYS LOST (000s)

30

48

957

(a) INDUSTRIAL*

0.24

1.26

1.18

(b) SKILLS**

4.9

8.0

8.00

REPLACEMENT RATIO

0.18

0.18

0.24

MISMATCH

*Annual (absolute) change in the ratio of employee jobs in the production and
construction industries to total employee jobs.
** Ratio of manufacturing firms reporting skilled labour shortages to those reporting
shortages of other labour (source: CBI Industrial Trends Survey).
It is sometimes pointed that while many of the labour market variables that are
supposed to underlie the NAIRU changed during the 1980-92 period, much of the
evidence for a lower NAIRU appears to post-date 1992. Hence, some argue that the
changes in the labour market cannot be the explanation for the change in the NAIRU.

On the other hand, industrial relations experts like Professor William Brown of
Cambridge argue that the structural improvements in the labour market during the
7

I am grateful to my colleague, Stephen Nickell, for helpful discussions on these issues.
12

1980-92 period did not translate into improved wage performance until other catalytic
events induced firms to undertake radical industrial relations change in the early
1990s. Possible candidates as catalysts are the 1990-92 recession, and the re-election
of the government in 1992, which implied that many of the structural changes in the
labour market were not going to be reversed. There is case-study evidence in favour
of both these factors having played some role (see eg Brown et al (1999)).

Other

possible catalytic events include the adoption of an explicit inflation target after 1992.
Personally, I have no problem with the notion that structural changes can take time
before they manifest themselves in improved macroeconomic performance.

Any

changes to the way labour is used (eg reforming pay systems, improving selection,
etc) requires managerial effort, and takes time to get in place and be effective.

Of course, it is plausible that some of the improvement in the wage-unemployment
trade-off during the late 1990s is attributable to lower import prices – caused by a
combination of an appreciation of sterling, weak commodity prices during the
1997-98 Asian crisis and possible supply-side improvements in other countries. Note
though that the trade-off appeared to improve after the UK left the ERM in 1992 even
though a fall in sterling boosted import prices.

Looking over the last decade, it is reasonable to believe that the NAIRU has fallen
because of, both, labour market improvements and the intensification of product
market competition, some of which may have been associated with changes in
regulation.

Moreover, it is possible that recent outcomes (1998-99) have been

somewhat flattered by lower real import prices during 1997-98. Looking ahead, the
higher real import prices over the past year (mainly due to higher oil prices) should
worsen the apparent short-run trade-off, but the likely intensification of product
market competition (through the internet, etc) should continue to help reduce the
NAIRU over the next few years.

Obviously, this is a complex affair, and I am not

surprised that Chairman Greenspan was recently quoted as saying:

“My forecast is that the NAIRU which served as a very useful statistical
procedure to evaluate how the economy was behaving over a number of years,
like so many types of temporary models which worked, is probably going to fail
in the years ahead as a useful indicator … .” (Reuters, July 20, 2000)

13

It will, therefore, remain especially important to closely monitor actual developments
as we attempt to form the difficult judgements in this area.

Recall that the

intensification of product market competition has already gone on for several years.
At some point, this process will come to an end. It will be important for us to be
vigilant to signs that this might be happening.

I have, so far, discussed how structural changes in the economy make an assessment
of the conjuncture and the preparation of our inflation forecast a rather tricky matter.
However, our problems are compounded by the existence of measurement error, an
issue to which I turn next.

SECTION 3
SOME PROBLEMS CAUSED BY MEASUREMENT ERROR
It is inevitable that the economic aggregates that we are interested in will be measured
with error. If the size of the bias caused by measurement error varies significantly
over time, this can make it especially difficult to set policy appropriately.

I shall

discuss a couple of illustrative examples below.

3.1

MEASURING THE SUPPLY POTENTIAL OF THE ECONOMY

We discussed above the use of the NAIRU in policy-setting.

A closely related

concept is that of the ‘output gap’, which is the difference between actual and
potential output. Of course, the level of potential output is rather difficult to measure.

3.1.1 SOME US EVIDENCE
Researchers at the US Federal Reserve System (see Orphanides and Norden (1999))
have shown that:

“… .. the ex post revisions of the output gap are of the same order of magnitude
as the output gap itself, … .. and the real-time estimates tend to be severely biased
around business cycle turning points, when the cost of policy induced errors due
to incorrect measurement is at its greatest.”
In related research, Orphanides (1999) argues that:

“The evidence points to misperceptions of the economy’s productive capacity as
the primary underlying cause of the 1970s inflation.”

14

As we argued above, estimating the level of equilibrium unemployment (or, relatedly,
the level of potential output) at a time of significant structural change is extremely
difficult.

Just as it is possible that a ‘supply shock’ in the form of cheaper

information costs is plausibly boosting the level of potential output today, a ‘supply
shock’ in the form of much higher oil prices (in real terms) hurt productive capacity in
the 1970s, and the work of Orphanides suggests that policymakers and the economics
profession in general may have been a little slow to realise that.

3.1.2 ALTERNATIVE CONCEPTUAL MEASURES OF THE CAPITAL
STOCK
At the Bank, one of our methods of computing the supply potential of the economy
relies on summing the weighted growth rates of employment, the capital stock and
technical progress. Among other things, it is obviously rather important to use a
measure of the capital stock which reflects its productive potential when performing
this calculation.

The different methods of obtaining a measure of the capital stock

can yield rather different results.

For example, current ONS estimates of the capital stock are a so-called ‘wealth type
measure’, where each item is weighted by its current asset price. While this is a valid
measure for balance sheet purposes, it will be less appropriate for an assessment of
productive potential, where one might want to compute an index of the volume of
capital services (IVCS hereafter) instead. Note that in the IVCS, each item of capital
is, in principle, weighted by its contribution to output (ie its marginal revenue
product) rather than its asset price. A consequence of using the IVCS instead is that
it increases the weight accorded to shorter-lived assets such as machinery, equipment
and software relative to buildings. If the stocks of shorter-lived assets (eg computers)
are growing more rapidly than other types, then the IVCS will, in turn, grow more
rapidly than the wealth-based measure.

Nicholas Oulton of the Bank of England has computed a preliminary measure of the
IVCS, which may, for purely illustrative purposes, be compared to the wealth-based
aggregate (see Figure 5).
Figure 5

15

Comparison of measures of capital input
growth (% p.a.)
7
IVCS

6
Net stock

5
4
3
2
1
0

1979 1982 1985 1988 1991 1994 1997

-1

Notice that while, on the wealth-based measure, the growth rate over the last two
decades is broadly constant, the IVCS grew faster over 1989-99 (3.38% pa) vs 197989 (2.62% pa).

If one concentrates on the post-1996 period, then, the wealth-based

measure has grown at around 2% pa, while the IVCS measure has grown at around
twice that rate (approximately 4% pa).

Of course, this can make a significant

difference to any estimate of the growth rate of potential output. For example, if one
makes the extreme assumption that one’s estimate of total factor productivity (TPF)
growth is unaffected, then the alternative estimate of the growth rate of the capital
stock would imply an increase in the growth rate of potential output of as much as
0.6% p.a. which in relation to conventional estimates of a growth rate of potential
output in the 2%-2½ % p.a. area is a rather large difference. Note, though, that as a
matter of arithmetic, if the productive capital stock has indeed grown faster in recent
years, then measured TFP growth must have been slower, which might lead one to
lower the assumption about the trend growth rate of TFP.

This would

correspondingly lower the degree to which correct estimates of the growth rate of
potential output might be understated. Alternatively, the lowering of the measured
growth rate of TFP might lead one to question the plausibility of the GDP estimates.
Hence, the precise impact of the understatement of the growth rate of the productive
capital stock on the growth rate of potential output is necessarily uncertain, though the
direction of the bias is clear.

Fortunately, the Bank and the ONS are currently

cooperating on a project on the IVCS, and we await the results with great interest.

SECTION 3.1.3
16

ALTERNATIVE MEASURES OF ICT INVESTMENT
With the growing consensus that the growth of investment in information and
communications technology (ICT hereafter) has contributed to an upsurge in
productivity growth in the US, there is obvious interest in investigating the role of
ICT and productivity growth in the UK. I have initiated some work on this issue at
the Bank, though, as yet, I can only share with you some rather preliminary results.

Nicholas Oulton has started the project by applying US methods for measuring ICT.
He has used US price indices for computers and software, because they incorporate a
substantial amount of research into adjustment for quality change. Because ICT
products are extensively traded internationally, it is plausible that the rate at which
quality adjusted prices are falling should be much the same in all countries (after
adjustment for exchange rate changes).

However it should be noted that the

measurement of price indices for computers is conceptually very challenging due to
the rate of technological change and no single approach of quality adjustment is
without its drawbacks.
Table 4 compares the price indices used by both countries in their national accounts.
In computers and software, the UK price index was growing much faster than its US
counterpart in 1979-89. In computers, this gap narrowed in the early 1990s, but then
widened substantially in the latest period, 1994-98. In software, the gap narrowed in
1994-98 while still remaining substantial. In telecommunications, by contrast, the
gap was in the other direction over 1979-89.

Since then, it has been small by

comparison with other components.

TABLE 4
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE GROWTH RATES OF UK AND US1 PRICE
INDICES:
AVERAGE GROWTH OF UK INDEX MINUS AVERAGE
GROWTH OF US INDEX (% PA)
COMPUTERS2

SOFTWARE3

TELECOMMUNICATIONS2
EQUIPMENT

1979-89

7.32

13.20

-10.02

1989-98

6.61

10.09

0.34

1989-94

1.39

12.56

-2.05

1994-98

13.14

7.00

3.32
17

(1) US price indices adjusted for exchange rate changes.
(2) Uses the official producer price indices for computers and telecommunications for
the UK.
(3) Uses adjusted version of official US software price indices. For the UK, software
investment is deflated by the overall implicit deflator for machinery and
equipment.

Obviously, if inflation in computers and software is overstated in the UK, then real
growth has been understated, since it is money values that are measured directly.
Using US-style price indices should lead to higher estimates of ICT investment, GDP
growth and productivity growth for the UK (as we discuss below).

In the recently

released National Statistics Quality Review report, there are some calculations which
suggest that using US price indices for the computer industry (but not changing the
assumptions regarding software), the level of industrial production in 2000 Q1 would
have been about 6% higher, with much of the gap being established in the post-1997
period. There are those who believe that the hedonic price indices used by the US
actually somewhat understate inflation, and this is clearly a controversial area.
However, on the basis that it is important to be aware of the quantitative importance
of alternative assumptions about price indices in the ICT sectors, I shall discuss some
preliminary illustrative estimates of the potential biases in estimated GDP growth
below.
Note that there are other important differences between ICT measurement practices in
the US and the UK which might also have the effect of overstating the amount of ICT
investment in the US versus the UK.

For example, although the growth rate of software investment (measured in current
prices) is very similar in the US and the UK, there is a large discrepancy in the levels.
Specifically, in the US, software investment has averaged 140% of computer
investment, while, by contrast, the corresponding ratio was only 39% in the UK.
Since people buy computers to run software, it seems very unlikely that there should
be such a large discrepancy between the UK and the US. This striking difference in
the estimated levels of software investment might arise because of differences in the
interpretation of what is investment, and what is intermediate consumption in
computer services – in the US, about three-fifths of the total products of the computer

18

services industry is classified in investment – in the UK, the corresponding proportion
is less than one-fifth.

Therefore, Oulton suggests, for illustrative purposes, that it might be appropriate to
inflate the UK figure for software investment by a factor of 3, which is at the lower
end of the possible range of grossing-up factors considered by him. Of course, this is
an extremely difficult area, and because of the paucity of reliable information, what
might seem a conservative assumption to someone, might appear to be too high to
another. However, as a policymaker, it is important to be aware of the full range of
possibilities, and it is in that spirit that I look at alternative illustrative computations of
ICT investment.

In particular, on the official numbers, the UK lags the US considerably in terms of
ICT investment as a percentage of GDP (see Figure 6A).

By contrast, on Oulton’s

estimates, the UK stacks up rather well vis-à-vis the US (see Figure 6B).8

Figure 6A

Figure 6B

ICT investment: US and UK compared

ICT investment: US and UK compared
% of GDP

4.0

% of GDP

3.5

3.5

3.0

3.0

2.5

US ICT investment
(current prices)

2.5

US ICT investment
(current prices)

2.0

2.0

1.5
Original UK ICT
investment
(current prices)

4.0

1.5
Adjusted UK ICT
investment
(current prices)

1.0
0.5

0.0
1974 1977 1980 1983 1986 1989 1992 1995 1998

1.0
0.5

0.0
1974 1977 1980 1983 1986 1989 1992 1995 1998
Source: Estimates from BoE Internal Work

Source: Estimates from BoE Internal Work

Table 5 shows the impact of adjusting for the aforementioned biases on estimates of
GDP growth on Oulton’s assumptions.

Notice that the potential bias is substantial

(up to 0.38pp pa by 1994-98) and moreover, has been rising over time (only 0.07-0.1
pp pa during 1979-89).

If GDP growth has truly been 0.4% pa faster than we

8

Some authors (eg Kneller and Young (2000)) suggest that computers contributed very little to
productivity growth in the UK in the 1990s. However, they exclude the contribution of software and
telecommunications. On the measure of ICT discussed here, the contribution of ICT to productivity
growth would rise significantly.
19

currently believe, then this affects one’s estimates of productivity growth, which, in
turn, might affect our assessment of domestically generated inflationary pressure.
Note that if the growth rate of actual and potential output were higher than we thought
by the same amount, but this amount remained constant over time, then our estimates
of the output gap would be unaffected by this measurement error.

However, if the size of the understatement of actual output growth is rising over time
(on these numbers, it accelerated in 1994-98 by 0.25% compared to 1989-94), but
estimates of the potential growth rate are, in part, backward looking, then
contemporaneous measures of the output gap are likely to end up underestimating the
degree of slack in the economy.

Also, there are, of course, other indicators of inflationary pressure that we monitor
which would be affected by an understatement of productivity growth. For example,
measures of unit labour cost growth would obviously be overstated were productivity
growth understated.

20

TABLE 5
GDP GROWTH WITH AND WITHOUT ADJUSTMENT FOR ICT EFFECTS,
1979-98: PERIOD AVERAGES
INCREASE IN GDP GROWTH DUE TO ADJUSTING FOR:
GDP
growth
(not
corrected
for ICT)

Computers

Software
(low)

Software
(high)

Telecommunications
equipment

All three
together
(software
low)

All three
together
(software
high)

%pa
(1)

Pp pa
(2)

Pp pa
(3)

pp pa
(4)

pp pa
(5)

pp pa
(6)

pp pa
(7)

1979-89
1989-98

2.37
1.91

0.02
0.07

0.06
0.10

0.10
0.18

-0.02
0.01

0.07
0.17

0.10
0.25

1989-94
1994-98

1.17
2.83

0.00
0.15

0.07
0.14

0.15
0.21

-0.01
0.02

0.07
0.31

0.15
0.38

Of course, Oulton’s preliminary estimates are predicated on his assumptions and are
designed to be purely illustrative. It is possible that further work (with the active and
essential cooperation of the ONS) might lead to different point estimates of the size of
the biases in GDP growth. However, the direction of the bias in GDP estimates and
the direction in which the bias is moving seem relatively uncontroversial and as
policymakers, it is important for us to be aware of them.

Having discussed some examples of the problems caused to us by measurement
difficulties, I now turn to consider the issue of attempting to forecast likely
productivity growth, a rather important component of any inflation forecast.

SECTION 4
FORECASTING PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH
Currently, our best collective projection builds in the assumption that labour
productivity growth will not materially differ from its 40-year average of around 2%
pa. Of course, this is in sharp contrast to the US, where, in recent years, forecasts of
productivity growth have been increased significantly (by, at least, 1.00pp pa). Given
that it is accepted that ICT advances have played a significant role in recent US
productivity experience (see, eg Oliner and Sichel (2000) or Jorgensen and Stiroh
(2000)), and given the significant amount of ICT investment that has been undertaken
in the UK (the numbers discussed above suggested that, as a fraction of GDP, the UK
might even have invested as much as the US), it is rather puzzling that the UK does
21

not appear to have experienced any significant upsurge in terms of measured
productivity growth. I discussed above the ICT-related biases in the measurement of
GDP growth, with the preliminary illustrative calculations suggesting a recent
understatement of labour productivity growth of perhaps around 0.4pp pa.

However, if this were the only source of bias in the measurement of productivity
growth, this would, by itself, not change the fact that labour productivity growth in
1994-98 was below its average level.

Of course, there may be other reasons for

believing that productivity growth has been understated during the late 1990s. I have
previously discussed this issue at some length (see Wadhwani (2000b)), so I shall be
brief here, but I would point to –

(i)

Official data suggests that manufacturing productivity growth was zero during
1995-97, while survey responses from the CBI Pay Databank sample
suggested productivity growth averaged around 4% pa over this period.

(ii)

No-one has satisfactorily explained why the measured deceleration in
manufacturing productivity growth appeared to coincide with a rise in
profitability (over the 1995-97 period).

(iii)

The “hard-to-measure” service sectors have become more important over time.

Of course, more research is needed, but, as a policymaker, it is important to be alive
to the possibility that measured productivity growth numbers significantly understate
actual growth.

Even if there were no reasons for believing that historical, measured productivity
growth has been understated, one might believe that productivity growth might be set
to rise in coming years.

Another possible explanation for the fact that UK productivity growth has not risen
despite significant ICT investment is that there are time-lags associated with learning

22

how to use the technology appropriately. Note that US productivity growth did not
rise until after 1995 despite many years of significant ICT-related investment.
Hence, it is possible that productivity growth in the UK might be about to rise.

I do draw some encouragement from some empirical work reported in Bean (2000),
where he reports a significant link between average TFP growth and the share of ICT
investment in GDP for a cross-section of OECD economies. The economic impact of
ICT investment is estimated to be large, implying roughly a point-for-point response
of TFP growth to an increase in the share of GDP spent on ICT investment.

Yet another possibility is that the likely growth in the ICT sector in the UK (note that
productivity growth in the ICT sector itself has been a significant contributor to US
productivity growth) and the effects of the internet-related B2B commerce could lead
to a significant rise in productivity growth.9

In a special survey conducted for the Monetary Policy Committee during May 2000,
the Bank’s Agents found that UK companies expect a significant increase in B2B ecommerce over the next 2 years.

Figure 7 shows that while the vast majority of

businesses do not engage in B2B e-commerce now, over two-thirds expect to
purchase over the internet within two years.
Figure7

B2B E-commerce
80

% of respondents

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Now
Purchases

9

2yrs time
Sales

See Wadhwani (2000b) for a discussion of this issue.

Of course, there are those who are sceptical about the significance of the internet for
productivity growth – eg Gordon (2000) points out that the period 1860-1900 saw five
“clusters” of inventions including, electricity, the internal combustion engine,
chemicals, the telephone and indoor plumbing. He argues that in terms of the effect
on living conditions, the computer revolution cannot possibly measure up to these
earlier great inventions.

However, in terms of assessing the likely effects of the internet on productivity
growth over the next few years (which is primarily what central bankers care about),
it is important to assess the likely speed of diffusion of an invention alongside the
intrinsic merit of an invention.

On this criterion, the internet scores rather well

relative to previous inventions.

As The Economist (2000) points out, electricity

achieved a 50% share of the power used by America’s manufacturing industry 90
years after the discovery of electromagnetic induction, and 40 years after the first
power station was built. By contrast, the internet is approaching 50% penetration in
America 30 years after it was invented and only seven years since it was launched
commercially in 1993.

Of course, the Agents’ survey that I discussed earlier also

pointed to a quick take-up of B2B e-commerce. In the UK, 45% of adults had used
the internet by July 2000. Amongst these people, as many as 28% had already used it
for buying or ordering tickets/goods/services, while 70% did so for finding
information about goods or services. Kneller and Young (2000) point out that the
1990s have seen strong productivity growth in the Business Services sector, an area
which is ICT-intensive. Perhaps this is indicative of what might occur as ICT diffuses
more widely through the economy.

An additional reason for believing that productivity growth might rise is the
intensification of product market competition that was discussed in Section 2 above.
In standard bargaining models, one would expect this to lead to a reduction in the
degree of X-inefficiency. I must say that there is much anecdotal evidence that this
might be happening.10

10

One must, though, recognise the possibility that the fact that intensified product market competition
depresses profits might, of itself, hurt investment, and, thereby, labour productivity.

24

In the light of the above, some members of the MPC (including myself) have been
prepared to assume that, at least over the next two years, labour productivity growth is
likely to be above average.

It is possible to argue that we should ‘wait and see’ until there is a statistically
significant increase in observed productivity growth.

However, when I was a

student, some of my teachers often emphasised the distinction between an
‘economically significant difference’ and a ‘statistically significant difference’.
Actual productivity growth is notoriously volatile – waiting for a statistically
significant increase in productivity growth could lead to inappropriate policy.

For example, Table 6 shows some estimates of TFP growth in the UK for the post-war
period.

Note that estimated TFP growth slowed down by 0.64 pp per year over a

26 year period after the so-called “Golden Age” of 1950-73. A difference of 0.6pp is
economically significant for any assessment of underlying inflationary pressure (eg
measuring unit labour costs).

Yet, a formal statistical test (a t-statistic) would not

reject the hypothesis that the means of TFP growth are equal.

A monetary

policymaker who waited for a statistically significant change in TFP growth would
almost certainly have left interest rates too low in this case. Of course, it would
remain important to be vigilant to the possibility that what seemed like an
economically significant difference in productivity growth was not an entirely
transient phenomenon, but that is why monitoring a host of indicators is so important.

TABLE 6
TFP GROWTH IN THE UK, THE “GOLDEN “AGE AND AFTER

MEAN

STANDARD
DEVIATION

1950-73
“Golden Age”

1.52

1.47

1973-99
“After”

0.88

1.74

t-TEST FOR
DIFFERENCE
-

1.41

25

In discussing the challenges posed for monetary policy by the “new economy”, I
have, so far, concentrated exclusively on the supply-side effects.

Therefore, I now

turn to a brief consideration of the demand-side effects.

SECTION 5
AGGREGATE DEMAND EFFECTS OF A “NEW ECONOMY”
As Chairman Greenspan and others have argued, it is possible that an expected rise in
productivity growth leads to a rise in aggregate demand before one gets a
corresponding rise in aggregate supply. This is because, say, share prices rise in line
with the higher expected productivity growth before there is any necessary
improvement in supply-side performance. Higher share prices, in turn, are assumed
to boost consumption expenditure now.

The existence of such a wealth effect on

consumption is relatively uncontroversial, and the MPC has indeed allowed higher
share prices to boost its most likely forecast for consumption.

Note that it is difficult to make sense of the current level of global equity prices unless
productivity growth is expected to be rather higher than in the past.11

In this

situation, it seems to me that a forecaster should choose between two logically
consistent possibilities.

The forecaster might assume that productivity growth is

going to be higher and then build this assumption into, both, the demand side (through
higher share prices) and the supply-side.

Alternatively, if the forecaster is a “new

economy” sceptic, he/she should assume that share prices will actually fall when the
markets realise that productivity growth is not going to rise, and should therefore
build in lower aggregate demand. Personally, I am, therefore, a little uncomfortable
with the MPC’s best collective “most likely” projection, which builds in the demandside effects of a rise in productivity through higher share prices, but makes no
corresponding adjustment to the supply-side for productivity effects.

11

See eg Cecchetti et al (2000) for a discussion of how to understand the current valuation of equity
markets.

26

SECTION 6
KEEPING ONE’S SENSE OF PERSPECTIVE
There is much that is exciting about the internet and it is sometimes difficult to resist
being swept along by some of the hype that surrounds it.

Although I have argued

above that the “New Economy” (defined in the broad sense of changes in underlying
structural relationships) has already had a significant impact, it remains important to
keep one’s feet firmly planted on the ground.

As we have already discussed above, the last 200 years have been characterised by
significant technological change, and few would argue that the internet approaches the
major innovations in terms of their effect on lifestyles. Also from a central banker’s
perspective, one always has to guard against the possibility that underlying economic
relationships might be changing – recall that the policy mistakes of the 1970s were at
least partly attributable to a failure to realise that productivity growth had slowed
and/or the NAIRU had risen, so there is a sense in which we always inhabit a “new”
economy.

Turning to the current conjuncture in the UK, it is obviously gratifying that we appear
to be able to continue to combine relatively steady growth with low and stable
inflation.

A concern that some of us have is that the exchange rate remains

overvalued (vis-à-vis the euro).

It is possible that a sharp downward adjustment in

the exchange rate could have a large impact on measured inflation in the first
instance.

27

Figures 8A-8D
Measures of domestically generated inflation

Measures of domestically generated inflation

Percentage change on a year earlier

Percentage change on a year earlier

6

6

5

5
ULC adjusted for
trend productivity

4

RPIX excluding import prices

4

3

3

2

2

1

1

0
1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

0
1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

Measures of domestically generated inflation

Measures of domestically generated inflation
Percentage change on a year earlier

Percentage change on a year earlier

6

6

5

5

4

4

3

3

2

2

GDP deflator
measure excluding
export prices

ULC using measured
productivity

1

1
0

0
1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

1995

2000

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

Over the last few years the MPC has therefore been concerned about the fact that socalled domestically generated inflation (DGI hereafter) has been above our target of
2.5%, with RPIX being only restrained by a high exchange rate.

An encouraging

feature of the current conjuncture is that all the four alternative measures of DGI that
we monitor are either at or below the 2½% target (see Figures 8A-8D) for the first
time since 1996. So-called “new economy” factors like intensified product market
competition and higher (unmeasured) productivity growth have undoubtedly played
an important role in keeping DGI subdued. However, it remains important for DGI
to be relatively well-controlled. It has recently become fashionable to assert that

28

wage settlements should rise because headline inflation (RPI) is currently rather
higher than RPIX (3% vs 1.9%).12

It strikes me that a tendency for wages to follow

past headline inflation was perhaps true of a world where firms had considerable
product market power and inflation itself was not mean-reverting.

Currently, we

have a central bank that is mandated to maintain inflation at 2.5% at all times and
intense product market competition. It is therefore less likely that wage settlements
will rise significantly with headline inflation, but we must remain vigilant to this risk.

Another short-term risk to the benign inflation picture is the significant rise in the oil
price. While the MPC has accommodated the first-round impact effect on inflation,
we shall continue to look out for any evidence of second-round effects on wages,
which must clearly be resisted.

Once again, intense product market competition is

likely to stiffen the resolve of employers, who can be expected to resist oil-related
wage increases, but it remains important for us to be vigilant to this risk.

Inflation

expectations must not be allowed to rise. As discussed earlier, one is necessarily
uncertain about the relative contribution of low import prices and structural changes
to the improvement in the growth-inflation tradeoff. With import prices now having
risen, we shall “learn” more about this in forthcoming months. Therefore, monitoring
indicators of building wage or price pressures will be unusually important. It is
important to remind ourselves that, historically, misplaced hopes of a supply-side
improvement have led to poor policy decisions.13

More generally, it is important to emphasise that although the “New Economy”
considerations discussed above have important disinflationary effects, they do not
imply the death of inflation. It therefore remains important to continue to monitor a
variety of wholly conventional influences on inflation when setting policy.

12

The current RPI-RPIX differential is attributable to the abolition of tax relief on mortgage interest
payments in the last budget, and the four interest rate rises since September 1999. On the MPC’s usual
forecasting convention of unchanged interest rates, the RPI-RPIX differential should shrink to close to
zero by next April.
13
See eg the discussion in Orphanides (1999), discussed above.

29

BIBILOGRAPHY
Bank of England (1999) “Economic Models at the Bank of England”.
Bean, Charles (2000) “The Australian Economic Miracle: A view from the North”,
Paper presented at the Reserve Bank of Australia (rba-gov-au).
Browne, Frank (2000) “Is there a New Economy?”, paper presented at
Oesterreichische Nationalbank Conference, June.
Brown, W, Dickens, R, Gregg, P, Manning, A and S McIntosh (1999) “Everything
under a Fiver: Recruitment and Staff Turnover in Low Pay Firms”, Joseph Rowntree
Foundation, forthcoming.
Buiter, Willem (2000) “The New Economy and the Old Monetary Economics”, Bank
of England Quarterly Bulletin, May.
Cecchetti, S, Genberg H, Lipsky, J and S Wadhwani (2000) “Asset Prices and Central
Bank Policy”, ICMB/CEPR.
The Economist (2000), “Untangling e-conomics”, September 23-29.
Gordon, Robert J (2000) ”Does the “New Economy” Measure up to the Great
Inventions of the Past?”, forthcoming, Journal of Economic Perspectives
Jorgensen, Dale W and Stiroh, Kevin J (2000) “Raising the Speed Limit:
Economic Growth in the Information Age”, mimeo.

US

Kneller, Richard and Young, Garry (2000) “The New British Economy”, NIESR,
Mimeo.
Oliner, Stephen D and Sichel, David E (2000) “The Resurgence of Growth in the
1990s: Is Information Technology the Story?”, forthcoming Journal of Economic
Perspectives.
Orphanides, Athanasios and Simon van Norden (1999) “The Reliability of Output
Gap Estimates in Real Time”, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
mimeo.
Orphanides, Athanasios (1999) “The Quest for Prosperity Without Inflation”, Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, mimeo.
Wadhwani, Sushil (2000a) “British Unemployment and Monetary Policy”, Bank of
England Quarterly Bulletin, February.
Wadhwani, Sushil B (2000b) “The Impact of the Internet on UK Inflation”, Bank of
England Quarterly Bulletin, May.

30

