Monetary Policy in an Uncertain World
Speech given by
Charles Bean, Chief Economist and Executive Director, Bank of England

At Oxonia Distinguished Speakers Seminar, The Oxford Institute of Economic Policy,
Oxford
22 February 2005

Accompanying Slides

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Monetary Policy in an Uncertain World
Speech to Oxonia
Oxford, 22 February 2005
Good evening! The great statesman and scientist Benjamin Franklin – who received
an honorary doctorate of civil law from this University in 1762 – is famous for having
observed that there are only two certain things in life: death and taxes. But had he
been a member of the Monetary Policy Committee, he would have realised there is
certitude about something else – namely, uncertainty. For uncertainty is an everpresent feature of the economic landscape that monetary policy makers cannot escape.
Broadly speaking, there are three types of uncertainty that confront us on the MPC:
uncertainty about the data; uncertainty about the nature and persistence of shocks; and
uncertainty about the structure of the economy. I shall address each of these in turn,
drawing out some of the implications for policy on the way. In the context of my
discussion of uncertainty about the structure of the economy, I shall also have quite a
bit to say about the possible explanations for the unusual stability in macroeconomic
performance in recent years. But let me start with some observations on the problems
posed by data uncertainty1.
Uncertainty about data
A former Chancellor of the Exchequer once remarked that steering the economy was
like driving along a winding road looking only in the rear-view mirror. In fact there
are times when it seems as if it is a great deal more difficult, for that mirror itself is
misted up. We do not know where we are, or even where we have just been with any
precision. Virtually all the data we rely on are subject to measurement error, either
because of sampling error or because they do not correspond exactly to the economic
concepts that we are interested in. They appear usually only with a lag and can be
subject to considerable revision until well after the fact.
As an illustration of the need to take this issue seriously, Chart 1 shows the revision
pattern in the recent history of GDP growth, from its preliminary estimate that is
available a couple of months after the end of the quarter through to more recent
estimates. On average, first estimates of growth have been revised up by 0.1-0.2
percentage points over the period since the preliminary estimate was first published in
1998 Q3, but more striking is the relatively large variance of the revisions2.

2

I emphasise that this should not be taken as a criticism of those in the ONS and other
agencies that collect and assemble the data. Rather it simply reflects the inherent
difficulty in measuring the large and complex phenomenon that is the economy,
comprising millions of households and businesses, both accurately and in a timely
fashion. The ONS use a variety of data sources in constructing, say, their measure of
GDP, with more information continually accruing and being integrated into that
measure. Of course, they could wait two years or more until all the underlying
information were in before producing an estimate, but that would not be much good to
us on the MPC.
Instead, the MPC recognises that early releases of data are prone to revision and
combines it with other information that has in the past proved useful in predicting the
final vintage of ONS data3. The various business surveys produced by the CBI, BCC,
CIPS and others provide a source of such independent information. Though the
samples for these surveys are typically much smaller than those that the ONS can
draw on and the responses are usually qualitative, ie in the form of “balance of ups
over downs”, rather than quantitative in nature, statistical tests do suggest that they
have some incremental predictive content over and above the early releases of the
official data. In addition, sometimes one might want to “aim off” a piece of official
data because it is hard to reconcile with movements in other data series that economic
theory and previous empirical work suggests ought to move together.
A particularly pernicious form of data uncertainty relates to measuring the level of
aggregate demand relative to supply – a key determinant of inflationary pressure in
the economy. Aside from the fact that the early estimates of GDP are subject to
revision, supply potential is never directly observed but rather must be somehow
estimated. A popular approach in business cycle research is to use an appropriate
statistical filter to separate output into potential supply and the output gap, ie the
deviation of actual output from potential output. But there is a fundamental
identification problem here. To distinguish between a change in supply capacity and a
change in the intensity of use of factors requires an assumption about the way trend
output changes over time. For instance, it is usually assumed that potential output
grows smoothly, but it is possible that the rate of growth of technical progress actually
varies from quarter to quarter. Moreover, measures obtained from statistical filters are
usually subject to an “end-point” problem whereby the absence of any data for the
future makes the most recent estimates of potential output – and therefore also the

3

associated estimate of the output gap – particularly unreliable. But, of course, it is
precisely the recent past that the policy maker is most interested in!
In any case, on the MPC we prefer to build up our picture of the inflationary pressures
in the economy by considering the pressure of demand relative to supply separately in
the product and labour market rather than relating inflation to a single catch-all
measure of the aggregate output gap. But unfortunately neither of these is directly
observed either.
As far as the product market goes, one wants to be able to compare the volume of
output with that which could be produced with the inputs that are currently employed
when operated at a normal, or sustainable, rate. So one can look either at business
survey questions on capacity utilisation or use econometric estimates of a production
function. But, on the one hand, survey-based measures are problematic. They are
often only available for manufacturing – indeed it is conceptually hard even to define
capacity in some service industries, let alone measure it – and there are usually doubts
about exactly how the respondents interpret the questions that they have been asked.
On the other hand, measures of utilisation based on econometric estimates of a
production function are only as good as the underlying model of the production
technology.
But if it is tricky estimating the margin of spare capacity in the product market, it is
even harder to reliably assess its labour market equivalent. Much research effort has
been expended over the last 25 years trying to explain the movements in the
equilibrium, or natural, rate of unemployment in terms of changes in labour market
institutions, etc, both in the UK and in the rest of the OECD. While substantial
progress has been made, we are still a long way from having a complete story.
Moreover, the picture is muddied by the fact that people find jobs from inactivity as
well as from the unemployment pool. And if employers can recruit workers easily
from overseas, the whole concept of a domestic supply of labour may not even be
very relevant. Measures of vacancies and survey indicators of recruitment difficulties
provide a different perspective, but in the end one cannot do much more than look at
all the available indicators together and try to form a balanced judgement. However,
one needs to be acutely aware that judgement may be badly wrong.

4

The perils of real-time output gap mismeasurement have been forcefully pointed out
by Athanasios Orphanides et al.4 and Ed Nelson and Kalin Nikolov5. The former
conduct an ex post evaluation of monetary policy in the United States through the
1970s and 1980s. They use real-time data to estimate the output gap as it might have
appeared to policymakers at the time and then show how seriously an interest rate
policy that reacted just to inflation and the output gap, ie a conventional Taylor rule,
could go wrong as a result of mismeasurement of the output gap. They also show that
a policy that reacted instead to inflation and the change in inflation, rather than the
output gap, would have performed better (the reason being that the change in inflation
is related to the unobservable true output gap and thus serves as a proxy for it in the
policy rule).
Nelson and Nikolov adopt a similar approach for the United Kingdom, though
employing the forecasts and statements of the Treasury and the National Institute (as a
proxy for official Treasury thinking) to construct measures of the output gap as it
appeared at the time. They find that monetary policy errors due to output gap
mismeasurement contributed 3-7 percentage points to average UK inflation in the
1970s and 1-5 percentage points to inflation in the 1980s. So their analysis also
suggests that real-time estimates of the output gap can be seriously misleading.
The bottom line of all this is that, although the output gap may be an indispensable
intellectual construct for organising one’s thinking, the inherent uncertainty around
any given measure means that it should always be employed with a considerable
degree of caution and an appropriate degree of scepticism.
Uncertainty about shocks
The second source of uncertainty relates to the nature and persistence of the shocks
hitting the economy. Sometimes the shock can be pretty obvious, but its effect may
not be. For instance, the Golden Jubilee reduced the number of working days in 2002,
complicating the measurement of seasonally adjusted output in the economy. In other
cases, it may be not only the impact of the shock, but also its persistence, which is in
question, a good example being the recent rise in the oil price. Moreover, in this case
what matters for the economy is what the private sector, not the policy maker,
believes about the persistence of the shock. Futures prices provide some guide but
even they may not coincide with the perception of businessmen.

5

On other occasions, even the source of the shock may not be apparent. For instance,
long-term real forward interest rates around the world are currently at unusually low
levels (see Chart 2). But why this should be is not immediately obvious, especially
given the large budget deficits in some countries. It could be because the demand for
funds to invest is low because the marginal product of capital is low – but there is no
sign of the world running out of profitable investment opportunities, especially given
the rapid development taking place in China and elsewhere in the Asian subcontinent. Or it could be the consequence of demographics or increased saving by
households worried about their living standards in retirement. Getting to the bottom of
such puzzles is the daily task of those who work in central banks.
Moreover, the econometric models that all central banks use in forecasting are
estimated on past data that incorporate a mixture of different types of shocks. And the
shocks that are impinging on the economy now may be different from the average of
those that impacted on it in the past. In a first-best world, our models would be
specified at a deep enough level that the differential response to different types of
shocks would be properly spelt out. Building such models is at the core of much
modern macroeconomics, but we are a long, long way from achieving that objective.
Indeed, given that the macroeconomic data that we see results from the aggregation of
the decisions of millions of different economic agents, each of whom is subject to a
myriad of influences, such an ideal is almost certainly unachievable.
Instead, models will inevitably remain as gross simplifications, requiring a range of
more or less ad hoc features that help them to explain the past. In that case, when a
shock occurs the policy maker needs to ask whether or not the response of agents is
likely to be the same as it has been in the past. To give a particular example, consider
the housing market. As Chart 3 shows, in the past there has been a high correlation
between house price inflation and consumption growth, but that correlation appears to
have weakened in the last three years or so. The same phenomenon is apparent in
consumption functions that include house prices as well as the usual suspects
(income, wealth, etc), which typically suggest that consumption should have been
stronger than it was over the last three years or so.
The natural explanation for this is that the previous occasions of rapid house price
inflation have generally been associated with periods when income expectations
became markedly more optimistic and/or financial liberalisation. In such
circumstances one would expect to see both consumption and house prices rise
6

together, driven by these third factors. But this time round, the household saving ratio
has been pretty flat over the last three years, suggesting that these factors have not
been especially important. Instead, factors more specific to the housing market seem
to have been at work, including demographic developments that have raised the
demand for housing set against only a moderate rate of growth in the supply of
housing, as well as the impact of lower interest rates on the time profile of real
mortgage repayments. Of course, that does not imply the complete absence of a
structural link between house prices and consumption – housing wealth is, after all,
the key source of collateral for most households – but rather that one cannot
necessarily rely on past data correlations to be maintained in such circumstances.
Uncertainty about the structure of the economy
The third source of uncertainty, and that which I want to spend most time on this
evening, is uncertainty about the structure of the economy. Structural changes, either
real or apparent, can arise in just about any part of the economy. But a particularly
pertinent question that faces the MPC – as well as central bankers in other developed
economies – is whether the low inflation and unusual stability of both inflation and
growth in the last decade or so betokens fundamental changes in the way our
economies function or whether it is just a temporary aberration. Charts 4 and 5
illustrate this stability by displaying trailing moving standard deviations, calculated
over successive overlapping eight-year periods, of GDP growth and inflation
respectively for each of the G7 countries, excluding Japan (for which it is difficult to
construct a consistent time series for GDP over a long enough period). The extent to
which volatility has fallen across all the countries in the sample is striking.
The source of this “Great Stability”, which contrasts so markedly with the “Great
Inflation” of the 1970s, has been the subject of an increasing volume of research,
mainly but not exclusively focussed on the United States. Essentially three classes of
explanation have been advanced: good luck; changes in the structure of the economy;
and better macroeconomic policy.
Is it luck?
One possibility is that policy makers have just gotten lucky. According to this view,
the shocks impinging on the developed economies have been smaller and less
persistent than before. Moreover, they have also been less synchronised across
7

countries. There is clearly some merit in this view, but the last couple of decades have
not been entirely devoid of significant shocks, including the break-up of the USSR,
German re-unification, the Iraq wars, the Mexican debt crisis, the Asia crisis, the
LTCM crisis, the dotcom boom-bust, 9/11 and so on. And while there have been no
major oil price shocks on the scale of OPEC I and OPEC II, the fluctuations in oil
prices have nevertheless been significant from time to time, including over the past
year.
Jim Stock and Mark Watson6 report evidence suggesting that it is indeed such good
fortune that accounts for the reduced volatility of the business cycle over the last
couple of decades. But other authors, such as Steve Cecchetti et al., find that the
factors discussed below – and better monetary policy in particular – should take the
lion’s share of the credit. The real difficulty with assessing the relative importance of
luck compared to structural changes or improved policy is that the shocks are
identified with the residuals in econometric equations and there is no way of knowing
whether the size of those shocks has been reduced as a result of structural changes to
the economy or better policy.
Structural changes
Another possibility is that changes in the structure of economies mean that shocks
have a smaller or less persistent effect than in the past. There are at least three reasons
why this might be so. First, it may be the result of changes in the composition of
output of developed economies, away from manufacturing and towards services.
Because capital and durable goods are predominantly in manufactured, manufacturing
is typically more cyclical than services. So, other things being equal, a more serviceintensive economy ought to display less cyclicality than a more manufacturingintensive one. However, the shift in the composition of output has been so gradual in
most industrialised economies it is difficult to believe this is a major factor.
A second, and more plausible, reason can be found in the consequences of financial
deregulation, innovation and integration. Greater access to credit allows households
and businesses to smooth their spending when times are bad. The corollary is that the
saving ratio should be more volatile than it was in the past; that appears to be the case,
at least in the United States7. Moreover, financial innovation has led to the
development of new derivative assets that allow idiosyncratic risk to be diversified
more effectively, again making the economy more resilient to shocks8. Finally,
8

international financial integration enhances the scope for risk sharing across countries,
though the fact that portfolios are still heavily home-biased suggests that this last
effect may be rather weak.
A third possible reason lies in the impact of information and communication
technology on the inventory cycle. One might have expected that inventories would
act as a damper on cyclical fluctuations as they constitute a buffer between sales and
output and thus allow firms to smooth production. But in the past, inventories instead
seem to have acted as an amplifying mechanism, with stock levels behaving in a prorather than an anti-cyclical fashion. Better inventory management techniques have
allowed firms to keep production more closely in line with sales, so reducing the
contribution of the inventory cycle to the business cycle9. However, at best this only
seems likely to constitute a small part of the story. Changes in inventory management
have been pretty gradual. And the reduction in volatility in production is similar to the
reduction in volatility in sales, not greater as would be expected if this were the
correct explanation.
Better policy making
The final explanation for the Great Stability rests on improved policy making, in part
reflecting an improved understanding by policy makers of the way the economy
functions and the trade-offs that they face. So, and caricaturing only slightly, during
the 1960s and early 1970s policy makers saw themselves as confronted with an
exploitable Phillips curve trade-off presenting a stable menu of choices between
unemployment and inflation: one could have permanently lower unemployment if one
were prepared to accept permanently higher inflation. Even though Bill Phillips
himself recognised that the position of the curve might be affected by the state of
workers’ inflation expectations, that qualification was largely ignored by
policymakers.
By the start of the 1980s – partly as a result of the juxtaposition of high inflation with
rising unemployment in the 1970s and partly as a result of theorising about the
underpinning for the Phillips Curve by Milton Friedman, Ned Phelps and Bob Lucas –
policy makers had come to realise that no such trade-off existed in the long run and
that ultimately monetary policy needed to focus on controlling nominal, not real,
magnitudes. A by-product of this change in view was that official interest rates

9

became more responsive to inflation and, critically, that real interest rates rose when
inflation rose, in order to dampen demand and so push inflation back down10.
Parallel to this improvement in economic understanding there has been an
improvement in the institutional arrangements for conducting monetary policy, with
moves towards greater independence of central banks from their political masters and
greater transparency over the objectives of monetary policy. That is obviously the
case in this country, with the adoption of an inflation target in 1992 and the creation
of the Monetary Policy Committee in 1997, but similar trends can also be observed in
a number of other countries.
That better monetary policy might be the explanation for lower and more stable
inflation is perhaps not too surprising. More of a puzzle is how that connects to
producing lower volatility in output. Indeed if all nominal wages and prices were
flexible so that the Classical Dichotomy held, monetary policy would determine
inflation outcomes, but would be irrelevant to the behaviour of output.
But, of course, nominal wages and prices are not totally flexible, thus generating a
short-run trade-off between inflation and activity. Moreover, the slope of that tradeoff does seem to be related to the average rate of inflation. Thus Larry Ball, Greg
Mankiw and David Romer11 present cross-country evidence that suggests the shortrun trade-off is flatter in low inflation countries than in high inflation ones. Moreover,
time-series evidence also suggests that the Phillips Curve may be flatter when
inflation is low. Chart 6 plots CPI inflation against unemployment for the G712. The
changing character of the Phillips relationship is most marked in the United Kingdom,
where it has gone from being approximately vertical in the 1970s, to downward
sloping in the 1980s, to being approximately flat in the 1990s. But a flattening also
appears to be present to varying degrees in most of the other countries. Luca Benati13
has explored the changing nature of this relationship in the United Kingdom, showing
how it is related to the monetary regime in force, with a flattening taking place in the
1980s and a particularly high degree of stability about the relationship since the
adoption of inflation targeting.
This flattening of the apparent short-run relationship between activity and inflation is
predicted by some New Keynesian pricing models. Essentially, when inflation is low,
firms are likely to change prices less frequently and this leads to a weaker short-term
impact of demand fluctuations on prices14.
10

But it may also reflect the impact of greater credibility in monetary policy making, as
the behaviour of wage and price setters today will be affected by their expectations of
the general level of prices over the duration for which those wages and prices are set.
If prices are expected to remain stable then, say, a positive shock to demand is less
likely to lead to higher wages and prices, than if it promotes expectations of a higher
future price level.
That a flatter Phillips Curve might help to explain why inflation has been more stable
is not altogether surprising, as fluctuations in aggregate demand would have less
effect on inflation. However, other things being equal, there would be a corresponding
increase in the variability of output in contrast to what has actually happened. So how
can we explain the fact that the volatility of output also fell?
There are two possibilities here. First, as I noted earlier, policy makers probably have
a better understanding today of how the economy works than was the case 25 years
ago. But that has been coupled with greater realism about what monetary policy can,
and cannot, do as well as institutional changes that have tended to reduce the extent to
which short-term political considerations could dictate interest rate decisions. As a
consequence monetary policy has itself been less of a destabilising force than in the
past.
Second, as the counter-inflationary credibility of monetary policy increased, so central
banks found themselves better able to offset disturbances without the danger of
destabilising inflation expectations. To a degree this can happen automatically
through asset prices: a positive shock to domestic demand prompts an expectation of
higher official interest rates in the future, leading to a rise in longer-term interest rates
and an appreciation of the exchange rate, thus counteracting the original shock. In
other words, credibility enhances the effectiveness of policy through its impact on
expectations.
Policy credibility may enhance the effectiveness of policy not only in the face of
demand shocks, but also in the face of supply shocks. When policy is credible and
inflation expectations are well anchored, then the chance of an adverse supply shock
triggering a wage-price spiral is much less than when people believe that the central
bank will accommodate the shock and allow inflation to rise.

11

The possible importance of this consideration is illustrated by the response of
financial markets to the recent increase in oil prices. The spot price of oil rose by
around two-thirds between the beginning of 2004 and the autumn, with particularly
sharp increases in June-July and September-October (marked with the grey bars in
Chart 7). There were a number of reasons for this increase, including rapid growth in
demand associated with the global expansion, low stock levels in the United States,
geopolitical concerns in the Middle East and interruptions to supply in a number of
countries. The increase was almost certainly unanticipated as it was not remotely
signalled in the futures price which had been pointing to a modest decline in the oil
price to within OPEC’s $22-28pb target range.
Given the experiences of the 1970s, one might have expected the increase in oil prices
to lead market participants to expect an increase in inflation and market interest rates
to move higher in the expectation of monetary tightening by central banks. And
neither the rise in oil prices nor the increase in interest rates could be expected to be
good news for equity prices. But what happened? Inflation expectations implied from
nominal and indexed bonds hardly moved and market interest rates moved down
rather than up (Charts 8 and 9). Moreover, during the September-October period
equity prices actually strengthened (see Chart 10). Now there may be other
explanations for this constellation of asset price movements, not least as other shocks
might have occurred at the same time. But the natural interpretation is that with
inflation under control and inflation expectations well-anchored, market participants
believed that central banks would be able to pursue a more relaxed monetary policy in
order to offset the adverse demand effects of the oil price increase without needing to
worry about setting in train a wage-price spiral of the sort seen in the 1970s.
Some implications for policy
The apparently flattening Phillips Curve raises a number of issues for policy. Taken at
face value it appears to suggest that we could continue to push down on
unemployment with minimal implications for inflation. And it also appears to suggest
that if inflation is materially above (below) target then the policy maker needs to
engineer a very large recession (boom) in order to bring it back, ie the so-called
sacrifice ratio is large. But this would be seriously to misunderstand the nature of the
beast and to run the danger of repeating the mistakes of the 1970s.

12

First, the Phillips Curve plot in Chart 6 does not trace out a structural relationship
between unemployment and inflation. The approximate invariance of inflation to the
level of unemployment through the 1990s is consistent with a flat structural
relationship between the two. But it is also consistent with a conventional downwardsloping short-run structural relationship between the two that has been simultaneously
shifting to the left as the natural rate of unemployment fell with monetary policy
simultaneously ensuring that inflation remained stable. Now it is reasonable to believe
that the structural relationship is actually flatter than in the past, for the reasons laid
out earlier. But since the full effects of the labour market reforms of the 1980s and
1990s are likely to take time to work their through, it is equally plausible that the
natural rate of unemployment has been falling, while the operation of the inflation
targeting regime since 1992 should have helped keep inflation stable. So this is an
alternative explanation, observationally equivalent to a flattening in the short-run
Phillips Curve.
Seen this way, it is clear that the first and third sources of uncertainty that I have
talked about today here interact, with uncertainty about the natural rate of
unemployment making it harder to pin down the slope of the short-run trade-off
between unemployment and inflation and vice versa. As a consequence, there is
uncertainty both about the extent of the underlying pressures on inflation and about
the impact of changes in interest rates on inflation and activity.
How should policy be set in such circumstances? Very cautiously, I believe. It is
possible that the sustainable level of unemployment could be even lower than its
current level, which is already pretty low by historical standards. But equally, if that
were not the case, then continued attempts to push activity higher would at some stage
be likely to generate noticeable upward pressure on inflation as supply bottlenecks
become more prevalent. There are therefore good reasons to believe that the Phillips
Curve is indeed a curve rather than linear and there is some empirical evidence to
support that belief15. Moreover, if the increase in inflation were substantial, there
would be a potential loss to the credibility of the inflation target and a consequent deanchoring of inflation expectations. And once credibility is lost, it can be costly to
regain.
The second observation is that inflation targeting may be a particularly suitable
regime when the structure of the economy is changing. Unlike a policy regime based
around an intermediate target, such as the money supply, a regime described in terms
13

of the ultimate goals of policy does not need to be changed whenever the structure of
the economy changes – though the analytical processes within the central bank may
need to change substantially, of course. Furthermore, future inflation is something that
agents intrinsically care about – it affects wage and price setting behaviour and also
determines the real interest rate and thus affects aggregate demand too. Even if
structural change makes the policymaker less sure about his own ability to meet the
target, the existence of the target should itself help to keep private agents’
expectations pinned down. That might not be the case if the policy objective were
stabilising, say, nominal GDP as agents would become more uncertain about the
implications for inflation as a result of uncertainty about the supply-side. So this is
another reason to believe that inflation targeting may prove to be a more durable
regime than some of its predecessors.
The third observation relates to the link between monetary policy and asset prices.
Claudio Borio and Bill White16 and others have argued that one of the consequences
of the anchoring of inflation expectations and the flattening of the Phillips curve is
that overheating tends to be manifested in asset price inflation rather than goods price
inflation. According to them, the greater likelihood of asset price boom-busts also
increases the likelihood of future financial instability and this should be taken account
of in the setting of interest rates. Elsewhere, I17 have argued that this concern can be
satisfactorily accommodated within an inflation targeting framework because future
financial instabilities are likely to lead to a reduction in growth and a departure of
inflation from target, though it does require central bankers to take the long view.
There is no doubt, however, that such asset price boom-busts potentially complicate
the conduct of policy.
My final observation relates not to the conduct of policy, but rather to a detail of our
communication strategy. Each quarter, the MPC presents its projections for GDP
growth and inflation in the form of explicit probability distributions or “fan charts”.
Reflecting the unusual stability in the economy outturns have tended to be closer to
the centre of the forecast distributions than one would have expected. For instance, 14
out of 18 of the two-year-ahead forecasts for CPI inflation made between February
1998 and May 2003 lay in the part of the distribution covering the central 50%. The
equivalent figure for the GDP growth projections is 11 out of 18. Some commentators
have inferred from this that the variance on our fan charts is too wide. But these fan
charts portray the MPC’s subjective uncertainty over economic prospects. Given that
there must be at least some chance that the good performance of recent years is down
14

to good luck rather than structural changes or better policy, it makes sense not to
reflect all of the recent decline in volatility in our assessment of the degree of
uncertainty about future outturns.
Let me conclude my remarks by noting that the presence of uncertainty means that it
is inevitable that some monetary policy decisions will seem unwise after the fact.
Wisdom with hindsight is a wonderful thing, but unfortunately it is a luxury that
policy makers do not have. But we can at least strive to reduce that margin of
uncertainty by continually seeking to improve our understanding of the forces driving
the economy. For, as Benjamin Franklin also remarked, “An investment in knowledge
always pays the best interest”.

15

Endnotes
1

For a more extensive treatment of some of these issues, see Bell, M. (2004) ‘Monetary policy, data
uncertainty and the supply-side: living with the statistical fog’, speech to the Society of Business
Economists, 15 September.
2

For some analysis of revisions to National Accounts data, see Castle, J. and Ellis, C. (2002) ‘Building
a real-time data base for GDP(E)’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Spring, 42-49.
3

One might be tempted to argue that the ONS should use this information in constructing their own
estimates. But that might involve the input of a considerable amount of economic interpretation and
judgement. It is better that the MPC knows what the official data is based on and then chooses how to
interpret it in the light of other indicators, rather than the ONS making those adjustments.
4

Orphanides, A. Porter, R., Reifschneider, D., Tetlow, B. and Finan, F. (2000), ‘Errors in the
measurement of the output gap and the design of monetary policy’, Journal of Economics and
Business, 52, pp. 117-141.
5

Nelson, E. and Nikolov, K. (2001), ‘UK inflation in the 1970s and 1980s: the role of output gap
mismeasurement’, Bank of England Working Paper, 148.
6

Stock, J. and Watson, M. (2003), ‘Has the business cycle changed? Evidence and explanations’,
Federal Reserve Board of Kansas City symposium, Monetary Policy and Uncertainty. Cecchetti, S.,
Flores-Laguna, A. and Krause, S., (2004) ‘Has Monetary Policy Become More Efficient? A CrossCountry Analysis’ mimeo, presents a contrary view. The observation that it is difficult to draw any
conclusion because the size of the shocks may reflect structural changes or policy improvements is due
to Bernanke, B. (2004) ‘The Great Moderation’, speech to the Eastern Economic Association,
Washington, 15 February.
7

See Blanchard, O. and Simon, J. (2001), ‘The long and large decline in US output volatility’,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 135-164.
8

See Greenspan, A. (2004), ‘Economic flexibility’, speech to HM Treasury Enterprise Conference,
London, England, 26 January.
9

See McConnell, M. M. and Perez-Quiros, G. (2000), ‘Output fluctuations in the United States: what
has changed since the early 1980’s?’, American Economic Review, 90(5), 1464-1476.
10

See Clarida, R., Gali, J. and Gertler, M. (2000) ‘Monetary policy rules and macroeconomic stability:
evidence and some theory’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(1), 147-180, and Taylor, J. (1999)
‘An historical analysis of monetary policy rules’, in Taylor, J. (ed.), Monetary Policy Rules for
evidence on the United States and Nelson, E. (2003) ‘UK monetary policy, 1972-1997: a guide using
Taylor rules’, in Mizen, P. (ed.) Central Banking, Monetary Theory and Practice, Essays in Honour of
Charles Goodhart, for evidence regarding the United Kingdom.
11

Ball, L., Mankiw, N. G., and. Romer, D. (1988): ‘The New Keynesian Economics and the OutputInflation Trade-Off’, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 1-65.

12

The original Phillips relationship related wage growth to unemployment. The pictures are similar if
nominal wage growth rather CPI inflation is placed on the vertical axis.

13

Benati, L. (2004), ‘Evolving post-World War II U.K. economic performance’, Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking, 36(4), 691-717.

14

Though this need not always be so; see Bakshi, H., Khan, H., and Rudolf, B. ‘The Phillips curve
under state dependent pricing’ Bank of England Working Paper, 227.

15

For some recent evidence, see Dolado, J., Maria-Dolores, R., and Naveira, M. (2005), ‘Are monetary
policy reaction functions asymmetric?: The role of non-linearity in the Phillips curve’, European
Economic Review, 49, 485-503, and references therein.

16

Borio, C. and White, W. (2003), ‘Whither monetary and financial stability? The implications of
evolving policy regimes’, Federal Reserve Board of Kansas City symposium, Monetary Policy and
Uncertainty.

17

Bean, C., (2003) “Asset Prices, Financial Imbalances and Monetary Policy: Are Inflation Targets
Enough?” in A. Richards and T. Robinson, eds., Asset Prices and Monetary Policy. Sydney: Reserve
Bank of Australia, 48-76.

16

