Monetary policy and financial dislocation
Speech given by
David Miles, External Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England

To the Royal Economic Society, London
10 October 2011

I would like to thank Jochen Schanz and Arpad Morotz for research assistance, and others for helpful
comments. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the
Bank of England or other members of the Monetary Policy Committee.

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

Introduction
It is a tired cliché to say that we live in interesting times. And it is, like most clichés, used far too often; I
suspect that humans are inclined to think that the times they live in are far more interesting than other
humans who are alive later will think. But the economic times we are living through will surely be judged to
be worth remembering by anyone who has even a passing interest in such things for several generations to
come. One thing that makes them (uncomfortably) interesting is the long period that the richer countries
have now lived with the repercussions of the financial crisis. That crisis began in August of 2007, became
intense in the autumn of 2008 and has not subsided yet. It is over four years since Northern Rock failed in
the UK – that is today about as far in the past as the outbreak of the First World War was from the signing of
the Armistice.

It might have become easy to forget just how interesting monetary policy has become here in the UK
because until last Thursday policy has been unchanged for nearly two years. It was in early 2010 that the
last asset purchases were made. Further purchases of £75bn were started earlier today. It was more than
two and a half years ago in March of 2009 that Bank Rate was last changed. Judging by money market
interest rates and yields on short dated government bonds the market expectation is that Bank Rate will not
change for many months yet.

What is extraordinary about this – and what future generations will find interesting – is not so much that Bank
Rate has been unchanged for many consecutive months. Rather it is the place at which monetary policy has
been left – in other words it is the level (both of interest rates and of asset purchases) that has been
extraordinary rather than the fact that those settings of policy were, until now, not changed for many months.

The degree to which this is unusual is self evident when we look at Bank Rate (Figure 1). We have a record
of Bank Rate since 1694, when the Bank of England was founded. Over those 317 years the average level
of Bank Rate is close to 5% (the mean is 4.8%). The standard deviation of the level of Bank Rate is 2.2%.
With Bank Rate at ½% it sits at a level that is about 2 standard deviations below the average. Of course,
Bank Rate is not normally distributed – it does not fall below zero. But the log of Bank Rate might follow a
distribution that looks somewhat more normal (Figure 2). Today the log of Bank Rate is about five standard
deviations below the mean of log Bank Rate.

But you don’t have to believe that Bank Rate is really log normally distributed for it to be blindingly obvious
that where we have been for the past two and a half years is very unusual. Before 2008 the lowest level to
which Bank Rate had ever fallen was 2%. What is not so unusual is that Bank Rate should be unchanged
for a few years. As I have observed before Bank Rate was not changed for just over 100 years between
April 1719 and June 1822 – but Bank Rate was then left at 5%, not ½%

2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

2

Figure 1: Bank Rate

18
16

Mean: 4.8%
SD: 2.2%
Previous low: 2%

14
12
%

10
8
6
4
2011
2
0
1694

1744

1794

1844

1894

1944

1994

Note: Depicted are the Bank’s respective key rates over time: bank rate, minimum lending rate, minimum band
1 dealing rate, repo rate, and official Bank Rate.
Source: Bank of England.

Figure 2: Cumulative distribution of log Bank Rate

1

Probability

0.8
0.6

Normal cumulative
distribution function

0.4
ln(Bank Rate)
cumulative
distribution function

0.2
0
‐1

0

ln(0.5)

1

2

3

4

ln(Bank Rate)

Source: Bank of England

I think it has been right to set monetary policy at its most expansionary setting in the history of this country.
This may seem a bizarre thing to say when for much of the past two years inflation has been above the
target level of 2% and when it is quite likely that in the very near term it may go yet higher and get to around
5%. But setting monetary policy in the light of the current inflation rate – rather than in the light of where
inflation pressures might be when a change in policy made today will have its effect – cannot be sensible.
And it is not what the Monetary Policy Committee does. A better strategy is to do one’s best to understand

3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

3

why inflation is where it is and make an assessment of where inflation pressures will be over the next few
years. And for some time it has seemed likely that those pressures will fall away because the underlying
domestically generated forces driving up prices are weak and the factors that are responsible for taking
today’s inflation rate to around 5% are not likely to be repeated over the next few years. I will not spend time
this evening elaborating on this. It is set out in detail in the Bank’s August Inflation Report. An updated
assessment of those inflation pressures will be published in a few weeks with the November report.

A lot has happened since the August report and much of the news on demand, output, business confidence
and employment prospects right across Europe and in the US has been negative. Until recently there has
been less news on near term cost and price pressures – though commodity prices having held up through
the summer did fall in late September (Figure 3).

Figure 3: Commodity prices
Indices, 2008 =100

160
Agriculture and livestock
140
120
Industrial metals

100
80

Brent Crude
60
40
2008

2009

2010

2011

Note: The agriculture and livestock and industrial metals series are calculated using S&P (dollar) commodity
price indices.
Sources: Standard & Poor's and Thomson Reuters Datastream.

I thought it was right to maintain the stance of UK monetary policy through the first half of this year and into
the summer. But since August, the news on the economic outlook has been overwhelmingly negative. The
chances that inflation further ahead will sit below the target level have risen. In the light of that the decision
was taken last week to increase the size of the asset purchase programme. Tonight I want to consider what
the impact of further asset purchases might be. There are three reasons for addressing that issue today.
First there has now accumulated a good deal of evidence (from the UK and from the US) about what the
impact of asset purchases made a few years ago has been, and it is worth assessing that. Second, there is
also a good deal of scepticism – even from those who believed that asset purchases in the UK in 2009 did
some good – that it can be effective today. Third, and most obviously, further asset purchases are now –
starting this week – about to be made. I want to look at what we might have learned from past asset
purchases and what we should infer about the impact of more asset purchases now.
4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

4

Let me start by briefly describing the environment in which the decision to make further asset purchases was
made, and how it had changed over the summer.

What has changed?
When the Bank published its latest Inflation Report two months ago, it seemed to me that the main drivers of
growth would be net trade and private investment. It also seemed to me plausible that the cost of bank loans
would gradually fall back as remaining stresses with banks’ funding continued to lessen.

Since then, bad news has arrived on a number of fronts. The international growth outlook has worsened,
reflected in declining business confidence in a number of countries. In the UK, output surveys have
deteriorated markedly, suggesting that GDP might be broadly flat in the fourth quarter. Employment growth
has slowed and the unemployment rate edged up to 7.9% in the three-months up to July. Consumer
confidence has fallen. Surveys of investment intentions point to only weak growth in capital spending ahead.

Financial market sentiment deteriorated markedly over the past couple of months; it remains exceptionally
volatile. Equity markets have fallen substantially, globally and in the UK: by the end of September, the S&P
Global Index had declined by around 15%, and the FTSE 100 by almost 12%, from the levels of July
(Figure 4).

Figure 4: Global equity price indices

8000

2000

7000

1800
1600

6000

1400

5000

1200

4000

1000

3000

800

2000

FTSE100 (lhs)

600

S&P Global (rhs)

400

1000

200
11 Sep

11 Jun

10 Dec

11 Mar

10 Sep

10 Jun

10 Mar

09 Sep

09 Dec

09 Jun

09 Mar

08 Sep

08 Dec

08 Jun

08 Mar

07 Sep

0
07 Dec

0

Source: FTSE and S&P.

5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

5

Gross issuance of corporate bonds by UK private non-financial corporations (PNFCs) almost stalled over the
summer months. Major UK banks’ CDS premia, one indicator of banks’ wholesale funding costs, have
almost doubled, from around 150bp at the end of July to around 250bp at the end of September (Figure 5).
Figure 5: Selected international banks' CDS premia(a)
Basis points
450
United States (b)

400

European (excl. UK)(c)

350

United Kingdom (d)

300
250
200
150
100
50

Jan. Apr. Jul. Oct. Jan. Apr. Jul. Oct. Jan. Apr. Jul. Oct. Jan. Apr. Jul.
2008
09
10
11

0

Source: Markit Group Limited.
(a) Unweighted averages of five-year, senior CDS prices.
(b) Average of Bank of America, Citi, Goldman Sachs, JP Morgan Chase & Co and Morgan Stanley.
(c) Average of BBVA, BNP Paribas, Crédit Agricole, Credit Suisse, Deutsche Bank, Santander, Société Générale, UBS and UniCredit.
(d) Average of Barclays, HSBC, Lloyds Banking Group, RBS and Standard Chartered.

In part, this may have been a reaction to the perception that demand had weakened at a global level. But
fiscal developments also continued to influence financial markets. Existing concerns about the sustainability
of fiscal positions and the implications for banking sectors spread to some euro-area economies that had
previously been less affected.

Investors tried to reduce their exposure to risky assets and sought refuge in ‘safe haven’ assets. Ten-year
nominal gilt yields fell to historically low levels (Figure 6).

Whether the marked deterioration in financial markets and in business and consumer optimism will last is
hard to know – conditions have certainly been volatile from one week to the next since August. But
monetary policy needs to be set in real time. We cannot stop the clock. Right now the likely future levels of
UK inflation pressures look to me materially lower than in August. Monetary policy should respond to that.
The question I want to consider is what can be expected to be achieved through more asset purchases.

6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

6

Figure 6: International ten-year nominal government bond yields(a)

United States
United Kingdom
Germany

Per cent
7

6

5

4

3

2
00

02

04

06

08

10

Source: Bank calculations.
(a) Spot interest rates derived from the Bank's government liability curves.

The effects of the Bank of England’s asset purchases during 2009/10
When the Bank started to purchase assets in early 2009, its objective was the same as for a cut in Bank
Rate. At the time, the MPC was concerned that demand for goods and services would fall so much behind
supply that inflation would fall below target towards the end of the Bank’s forecast horizon. Asset purchases
were designed to stimulate demand so that the Bank could meet its inflation target.

Since then, economists in the Bank have undertaken several empirical studies of the impact these asset
purchases had on gilt yields, the price of risky assets, output and inflation. A recent article in the Bank of
England’s Quarterly Bulletin summarises the results of these studies.1 One of the most direct ways of
assessing the impact of asset purchases is by looking at changes in asset prices around the dates at which
purchases were announced. Table 1 shows estimates of these announcement effects in the middle column,
and changes over the entire period of asset purchases in the right column.

While prices of assets respond quickly to news, demand and inflation adjust far too slowly to allow their
reaction to be captured by event studies. Economists at the Bank have therefore used a variety of other
empirical methods, for example estimating vector auto-regressions (VARs), to evaluate the impact on output
and prices. The key difficulty is to separate the effect of asset purchases from that of other factors. But a
range of estimates – based on different assumptions designed to control for the impact of other factors –
suggested that the asset purchases had about the same effect as a cut in Bank Rate of between 150bp to
300bp, increasing GDP by about 1.5% to 2%.

1

See Joyce, M, Tong, M, and Woods, R (2011), ‘The United Kingdom’s quantitative easing policy: design, operation, and impact’, Bank
of England Quarterly Bulletin, pages 200-212.
7

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

7

Table 1: Event study: Asset Purchases in 2009/10
Asset

Event study: Change

For reference: Change

around announcement

4 March 2009 – 31 May 2010

Gilt yields

- 100bps

+ 30bps

Corporate yields

- 70bps

- 400bps

Corporate yields (high yield)

- 150bps

- 2,000bps

FTSE All-Share

- 3%

+ 50%

(investment grade)

Source: Bank of England (2011).

The difficulty these studies face is that the Bank has not made large scale asset purchases during most of its
recent history. It is therefore not possible to find time series of big asset purchases, inflation, and output with
sufficient variability to identify the impact of large-scale purchases on the wider economy directly. Instead,
the studies proceed in two steps. They first estimate the impact of asset purchases on bond yields and
money aggregates, for example using the announcement effects presented in Table 1. And then they rely
on the typical effect of changes in bond yields and money stocks on inflation and GDP – based on many
decades of data. This allows one to come up with estimates of the overall effect of asset purchases on the
wider economy.

Joyce et al (2011) describe the methods used in more detail. The results are summarised in Table 2.

Table 2: Estimates of the macroeconomic impact of QE, peak impact on the level of output
Method

Level of GDP (per cent)

SVAR

1.5

Multiple time-series

1.5

models
Monetary approach

2

Bottom-up approach

1.5-2.5

Range across methods

1.5-2

Source: Bank of England (2011). Range across methods calculated using the mid-point of the reported range for the bottom-up
approach.

In the first set of models – referred to as SVAR and time-series models – the authors took as given that asset
purchases reduced gilt yields over the respective model’s forecast horizon by 100bps. In another (‘monetary
approach’), the authors assumed that asset purchases increased money supply (M4) by between about
£80bn and £200bn. In the final approach (‘bottom up’), the authors first assessed the increase in asset
prices associated with QE, and then used standard models to relate the associated increase in household
and corporate wealth to changes in consumption and investment.

8

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

8

So these estimates reflect results from applying a wide range of econometric techniques. I should say here I
am not someone who readily believes the apparently precise results of regressions. This is probably
because I have in my life run lots of regressions. This is something which is relatively very easy to do but
because of that it can make a mockery of the claims for statistical significance of many reported results. So I
am rather sceptical about the reliability of many econometric estimates – though it is reassuring that a range
of very different techniques (various time-series models and event studies) give broadly similar results for the
impact of the £200 billion of asset purchases made so far in the UK. But I would certainly take these results
much less seriously if these were just apparent empirical regularities for which there was no plausible
economic mechanism that could have generated them. Let me put the point in a less negative way. I
believe that there are very good reasons for thinking that purchases of government bonds in exchange for
money created by the central bank will have an impact on a range of asset prices and will influence the cost
and availability of credit to the private sector. I will explain some of the mechanism through which I think this
works in a moment. Most of them reflect portfolio re-allocations made by those who sell bonds to the Bank
of England and which trigger impacts in a wide range of markets beyond the gilt market.

My belief in this set of mechanisms was not based on the results of an econometric exercise – it was not
driven by simulation results from an estimated VAR. It was based on the basic idea of portfolio theory which
suggests strongly to me that many of those who sold fixed income instruments with significant duration to the
Bank of England in exchange for cash would subsequently set in train a series of further transactions that
would influence a wider set of prices and also create flows of funds that could change credit conditions.

What I found hard to assess was how powerful those mechanism were. Was £200 billion of gilt purchases
the equivalent monetary easing of cutting Bank Rate by 100bp or 500bp? In Bayesian terms, I had a strong
prior that the impact of purchases on the scale made in 2009 was significant, but I had relatively flat priors
about just how significant. The econometric evidence – some of which was not strongly based on a
particular model of portfolio re-allocation and some of which was more closely tied to portfolio theory – has
helped me sharpen my estimate of the impact of QE. But for me without the prior belief that there were
plausible economic mechanisms that generated such impacts the weight I would place upon the econometric
evidence of those effects would have been substantially less.

So what are the elements of the transmission mechanism of asset purchases? In my view, there are two,
somewhat distinct (though related) channels. The first channel operates through the impacts on a range of
asset prices of the portfolio rebalancing in the non-bank private sector that central bank purchases generate;
the second is via potentially alleviating bank funding constraints should they exist. The first would operate in
most circumstances and I think is generally likely to be the more important. The second channel might
operate only in conditions when banks face funding problems. Asset purchases ease credit conditions and
stimulate demand, possibly via both channels but more consistently via the first. Figure 7 provides a stylised
overview of them.

9

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

9

Figure 7: Key channels for the impact of the Bank of England’s gilt purchases on domestic demand

Portfolio substitution
channel (always operates)

Gilt yields 

Bank of
England gilt
purchases

Term premia 
Yields on long‐dated
risky assets 

Cost of accessing
credit in financial
markets

Bank deposits and liquid
assets

Wealth 

Domestic
demand

Credit risk
premia 

Availability of
bank credit

Bank funding channel (may operate in
conditions of stressed bank funding)

Consider first the portfolio substitution channel, shown in the upper half of Figure 7. The Bank of
England’s purchases of gilts reduce the free float of gilts while increasing central bank reserves of banks. It
is likely that most gilts are purchased from non-banks (since that is where most gilts are). Initially most of the
proceeds from the sale of gilts show up in bank deposits. If gilts and bank deposits were perfect substitutes
when interest rates are close to zero that might be the end of the story – in terms of portfolio rebalancing for
the non bank private sector – and it is not clear that gilt yields would react. The economy would be in a
liquidity trap: in that situation additional supply of money does not lead to a reduction in bond yields or in any
other yields. So people who sold gilts would swap them for bank deposits; and banks might just passively
accept higher reserves at the Bank of England.

But bank deposits and bonds are not perfect substitutes. There are at least two (related) reasons for this,
one related to preferred habitats, and the other to the pricing of duration risk.

When investors sell gilts to the Bank of England, they initially exchange a long-dated asset – the gilts – for a
short-dated asset: bank deposits. Some investors may not care much about the resulting change in duration
in their portfolio. But I believe that they would be in a minority. Many investors in gilts – primarily pension
funds and insurance companies – have long-dated liabilities and prefer to match these liabilities with equally
long-dated assets.2 Figure 8 shows that pension funds and insurance companies own about 30% of gilts.
These investors are likely to purchase other long-dated assets, such as corporate bonds, to restore the
duration of their portfolio

2

One also speaks of investors having preferred habitats in certain classes of assets.
10

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

10

Figure 8: Stocks of gilt holdings by sector(a)
£bn
1200

Other (households, local authorities, public corporates, PNFCs)
ICPFs

1000

OFIs
Non‐residents
800

UK MFIs, excl. BoE
Bank of England
600

400

200

2005 Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
2006 Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
2007 Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
2008 Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
2009 Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
2010 Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
2011 Q1

0

Sources: ONS and BoE.
(a) Market values. Total excludes central government holdings.

Yields of long-dated securities might also fall for another reason. By purchasing gilts, the Bank of England
reduces the stock of privately held, relatively long-dated assets. With less duration risk to hold in the
aggregate, those in the market that needed to be induced to take it should require a lower premium. This
tends to reduce the term premium for all long-dated assets.
For both these reasons, the prices of long-dated risky assets – corporate bonds and equities – are likely to
rise. Sterling corporate bond yields did indeed decline substantially since the start of the Bank’s asset
purchase programmes (Figure 9), particularly in 2009 when most of the purchases were made.
Figure 9: Sterling corporate bond spreads for financials, non-financials and high yield(a)
Basis points

Basis points

1200

3500
Financials (rhs)

3000

1000

Non-f inancials (rhs)
2500

High yield (lhs)

800

2000
600
1500
400
1000
200

500
0
2007

0
2009

2011

Sources: Bank of America/Merrill Lynch and Bloomberg.
(a) Spreads of corporate bond yields over reference gilt yields.
11

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

11

How much of that decline was due to asset purchases by central banks is impossible to tell from a graph of
course – which is why one does econometrics. But what is clear is that this is helpful for companies who can
directly tap the capital markets. These companies may be able to replace bank funding with funds directly
raised on financial markets. There is evidence that this happened during 2009 (Figure 10).

Figure 10: PNFC substitution of bank debt to capital market issuance(a)
Annual flow as % of nominal GDP
6
Capital issues

5

Loans
4
3
2
1
0
‐1
‐2
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Source: Bank of England.
(a) The capital issuance series shows the net amount raised from sterling issuance of equity, bonds and commercial paper by UK
PNFCs. Lending series is sterling net lending to PNFCs excluding the effects of securitisation.

The decline in yields and the rise in asset prices also generates capital gains for households who own risky
assets, and they may decide to consume part of their increased wealth.

It is important to note that the impact of asset purchases by the central bank on the yields on risky assets is
the sum of any impact on gilt yields plus the impact on the spread between the yield on risky asset yields
over gilts. A reduction in gilt yields is not necessary for gilt purchases to have an effect on the real economy
via the portfolio balance mechanism: if the spread falls, asset purchases would be affecting the cost of
finance to the private sector and potentially generating capital gains even if gilt yields are unchanged.

There are certainly conditions under which the sort of portfolio re-balancing and re-pricing I have described
would not happen. Gauti Eggertsson and Michael Woodford present a model in which they do not.3 The
essence of this is that if the private sector – in the form of a single representative agent who has an infinite
horizon and is rational – sees the assets held by the government and by the central bank as
indistinguishable from their own assets then any swap of assets with the central bank cannot change
anything. This is true and is analogous to the Ricardian Equivalence proposition. But the representative
agent assumption is a very strong one. And the conditions for the result to go through are not likely to hold
3

Eggertsson and Woodford (2003), The zero bound on interest rates and optimal monetary policy, Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity Vol. 2003, pages 139-211
12

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

12

even in unstressed financial markets – let alone in the wake of a financial crisis where markets are still not
operating smoothly.

Let me turn to what I have called the bank funding channel (Figure 7). I see this as a channel that might
help improve the availability of bank credit (or prevent it getting less available). I use the word ‘might’
because it is only under conditions of stress in the availability funds to individual banks that I would expect it
to operate.

The more concerned banks are about their ability to refinance themselves, the less likely they are to grant
loans. When the Bank of England purchases gilts owned by non-banks, all else equal, banks’ deposits rise
as do reserve balances at the central bank. To the extent that a bank’s reserve holdings would then come to
exceed its demand for liquidity, it is likely to be more willing to expand lending. Or, if a bank had already lost
some other funding, it might be able to avoid a contraction in its lending or a sale of less liquid assets.

The bank funding channel might be weak. It would be weak when the funds generated by the central bank
asset purchases come to banks as very short-term wholesale deposits, and banks feel the need to increase
their liquid asset holdings (in the form of reserve balances at the central bank) to insure against the risk that
these deposits might be withdrawn at short notice. But even then it may be that banks increase their liquid
assets by less than the amount of short-term inflows. Should the money inflow to a bank – generated by
asset purchases by the Bank of England – be in the form of longer-term funds (term deposits, bonds, or even
purchases of bank equity), then it is more likely that the additional funds could help banks expand, or at least
avoid contracting, their lending.

What will be different this time?
Gilts comprise the vast majority of all assets that the bank bought in 2009/10: just above £198bn out of the
almost £200bn worth of asset purchases. The purchases of corporate bonds and commercial paper,
although relatively small, might have played an important role in stimulating these markets. The advantage
of gilt purchases is that the market for gilts is liquid and deep, and there is no credit risk. The homogeneity of
gilts (in terms of credit risk) means that the MPC is not drawn in to making credit allocation decisions
between issuers and deciding which firms get funding and which do not. That is not something which the
MPC is well placed to do. Liquidity and depth means that big purchases can be made relatively quickly. Net
issuance of gilts has been positive over the past two years, so that even excluding the Bank’s purchases the
value of outstanding gilts is now higher than it was at the time the Bank started purchasing gilts in
March 2009. At the time, the Bank concentrated its purchases on conventional gilts with a residual maturity
of greater than three years. There are now gilts with a market value of over £500bn falling in that category.
At the time the Bank embarked on asset purchases in the Spring of 2009, the figure was around £375bn.4

4

Data as of 2 March 2009 and 30 September 2011.
13

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

13

So I think there are good reasons why when further asset purchases are made to make monetary policy
more expansionary it is being done through buying more gilts. Of course that would not be much good if
buying gilts today was to have little impact. And conditions are different from 2009 – the period when the
asset purchase programme started and from when the evidence of its impact comes.

Gilt yields are now lower – ten-year yields were about 2.5% at the end of September compared to 3.5%
when the Bank started to buy gilts in the Spring of 2009, and 4.5% at the start of 2008. But indicators of bank
funding costs have increased. Figure 5 showed a simple measure of the cost of insuring against banks’
default. The higher this cost, the more expensive it is for banks to raise new funds. Spreads of corporate
over government bond yields have also risen (Figure 9), although they are still considerably lower than
during the first half of 2009. Bank issuance of debt securities in public markets has been very weak over the
summer months (Figure 11).

So some of the stresses that were clear in early 2009 have resurfaced. Survey evidence suggests that
tighter bank funding conditions might lead to a reduction in the supply of bank credit. The Bank of England’s
Q3 Credit Conditions Survey5 showed a marked increase in the proportion of banks who thought that
deteriorating bank funding conditions would contribute to a reduction in their supply of credit, in particular to
PNFCs. (This anticipated reduction is shown by negative scores in Figure 12.)

Figure 11: Term issuance by the major UK lenders in public markets(a)(b)

Sources: Bank of England, Dealogic and Bank calculations. Data subject to revisions.
(a) Includes debt issued by Banco Santander, Bank of Ireland, Barclays, Co-operative Financial Services, HSBC, Lloyds Banking
Group, National Australia Bank, Nationwide, Northern Rock and RBS. Term issuance refers here to securities with an original
contractual maturity or earliest call date of at least 18 months. It includes subordinated lower Tier 2 and Tier 3 capital instruments with
debt features.
(b) Includes unguaranteed senior debt; covered bonds; residential mortgage-backed securities; commercial mortgage-backed securities;
medium-term notes; subordinated debt; senior debt issued under HM Treasury’s Credit Guarantee Scheme; and other asset-backed
securities.
(c) Data updated as of 3 October 2011.
5

Bank of England, Credit Conditions Survey, 2011 Q3.
14

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

14

Figure 12: Influence of banks’ wholesale funding conditions on the availability of bank credit(a)(b)
20
10
0
‐10
‐20
‐30
‐40
‐50
‐60

PNFCs

Q4 2011*

Q3 2011

Q2 2011

Q1 2011

Q4 2010

Q3 2010

Q2 2010

Q1 2010

Q4 2009

Q3 2009

Q2 2009

Q1 2009

Q4 2008

Q3 2008

Q2 2008

Q1 2008

Q4 2007

‐70

* forecast

Household secured

Source: Bank of England, Credit Conditions Survey, 2011 Q3.
(a) Net percentage balances, calculated by weighting together the responses of lenders.
(b) A positive balance indicates that more credit is available.

Corporate bond issuance has almost stalled over the summer months (Figure 13).
Figure 13: Cumulative gross issuance of bonds by UK PNFCs(a)
£ billion
60

50

40
2009
2010

30

2011
20

10
2003 - 08
0
Jan

Mar

May

Jul

Sep

Nov

Sources: Dealogic and Bank calculations.
(a) Data are subject to revisions.

And the Bank’s Network of Agents reported in September that concerns about the withdrawal of overdraft
facilities at short notice had led some small firms to run permanent sizable cash balances, inhibiting
investment.6
6

Bank of England (2011), Agents’ summary of business conditions, September.
15

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

15

This deterioration of funding conditions suggests to me that asset purchases now could support credit and
demand growth not only via the portfolio substitution channel but possibly also via what I have called the
bank funding channel. In conditions of heightened stress in markets, some banks’ lending may become
constrained by their ability to raise deposits (either wholesale or retail). If QE generates more deposits for
some such banks – and certainly if it generates longer term funding – it could have positive effects.

Nonetheless there is a good deal of scepticism that asset purchases today will be particularly effective.

One reason for scepticism about the effectiveness of further purchases of gilts is that gilt yields are already
very low. Short-term yields are indeed extraordinarily low, though they are still significantly higher further
out in the yield curve: 5-year yields were at 1.4% at the end of September, but ten year yields were higher,
implying that five year yields in five years’ time were around 3.6% (Figure 14).
Figure 14: UK five-year nominal government bond yields(a)
Per cent
7
6
5
4

Spot

3

5yr f orward
2
1
0
Jan 07 Jul 07 Jan 08 Jul 08 Jan 09 Jul 09 Jan 10 Jul 10 Jan 11 Jul 11

Source: Bank calculations.
(a) Spot and forward interest rates derived from the Bank's government liability curves.

Yet even if we just focus on the impact of asset purchases on gilt yields, I am doubtful about the argument
that more asset purchases now will be much less effective. It might take a larger volume of gilt purchases to
drive yields down by 50bp now than when yields were higher. But a fall in yields of 50bp from, say, 2.5%
also generates more of a rise in asset prices than the same fall in yields from 3.5%. Consider how the price
of a perpetual bond would respond to a reduction in yields by 50bps. The price of a perpetual bond is just
the inverse of its yield. So reducing yields from, say, 3.5% to 3% drives its price up by
100*(3.5/3 -1) = 16.7%; whereas reducing the yield from 2.5% to 2% increases its price by 25%. So even if
the impact on yields per pound of purchases was only two thirds as big, the impact on prices would be the
same. Note too that the spreads in the yields on other assets (e.g. on corporate bonds) are not unusually
low today (see Figure 9). So it is not at all likely that the scope to reduce those spreads is very limited.
16

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

16

More fundamentally some might argue that additional asset purchases will mainly have an effect on inflation,
not on real variables. But in many sectors of the economy demand for goods and services appears to have
fallen behind productive capacity; it might fall further. The reason the MPC has embarked on a second
round of asset purchases is that it is more likely than not that otherwise demand would be so weak that
inflation would fall below the Bank’s target. That might seem farfetched today with inflation close to 5%. But
recall that between September 2008 and September 2009, annual CPI inflation dropped from 5.2% to 1.1%.

Conclusion
The outlook for growth in the UK has deteriorated over the past months. That means that domestic
inflationary pressures further ahead look lower than I thought in August. Stress has re-emerged in financial
markets, and concerns about the stability of the banking sector have re-surfaced. In the light of this, the
MPC has decided to resume asset purchases. That is where I think we stand today. It is an unusual
situation and to future generations it will, as I observed at the outset, look like an interesting period. For
today, it is not a comfortable situation to be in.

Let me finally take a step back and think about why we are in this uncomfortable position. In my view, the
key reason is the fragility of parts of the banking sector. And it seems to me clear that an important part of
the long-term strategy to stop this happening again must be to make the financial system – and banks in
particular – much more robust. As I have argued previously, I believe that the single most effective way to
do this is to have banks use much more equity and less debt to finance their activities so that their leverage
is reduced. This would mean that banks could withstand greater falls in the value of their assets before they
got near to a position where those who had provided debt were sufficiently concerned about not getting all
their money back that they withdrew funding.

But for today monetary policy should be set to help prevent the economy from stagnating and driving inflation
to sit persistently beneath the target. That is why today the Bank has started to buy more assets.

17

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

17

