Bank of England

Page 1

Old dogs, new tricks:
adapting central bank
balance sheets to a world of
digital currencies − remarks
by Andrew Hauser
Given at Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Columbia SIPA
Workshop on ‘Monetary Policy Implementation and Digital Innovation’,
New York
01 June 2022

Bank of England

Page 2

Speech
Introduction
The explosion of interest in digital currencies poses deep and challenging policy questions
on everything from monetary and financial stability, to privacy, competition, money
laundering and social inclusion. Public authorities are evaluating the arguments for and
against introducing their own Central Bank Digital Currencies (CBDCs).1 And in the
private sector there’s a lively debate about what it might take to make so-called
‘stablecoins’ genuinely stable.
Up to now, though, there’s been less discussion about how central bank balance sheets
might need to adjust to support the safe and effective provision of fiat-based digital
currencies. This workshop is therefore well timed.
I will focus my remarks today around five main messages.
1. Retail CBDCs could be a big deal for central bank balance sheets
Let’s start with retail CBDC – a central bank liability, in digital form, held directly by
individuals, and used to make day to day payments. Many of the raw ingredients of a
CBDC are already familiar to central banks: individuals can already hold our liabilities, in
the form of physical banknotes; and we already provide digital liabilities, albeit to only a
few depositors (predominantly banks).
The new thing would be to combine those ingredients together, at scale.
The question of whether to do so is complex, and beyond the scope of my remarks today.
The UK will publish a consultation on this issue later this year. But the implications for
central bank balance sheets will also depend heavily on how any CBDC is designed: on
who can hold it, where it can be used, how much can be held, and whether it is
interest-bearing (Table 1).

The Bank of England’s work in this area is available at: UK central bank digital currency |
Bank of England.
1

Bank of England

Page 3

Source: Bank of England

Design choices that placed the economic features of CBDC close to today’s banknotes
might have relatively limited implications for central bank balance sheets, at least in normal
economic conditions. Choices that positioned the economic features of CBDC closer to
today’s retail commercial bank deposits could have a more material impact.
To give some sense of potential scale, Chart 1 compares two stylised benchmarks – the
stock of banknotes; and 20% of retail commercial bank deposits2 – to the size of central
bank balance sheets between the period before the Global Financial Crisis and today. In
the UK, the upper end of that benchmark range is nearly half the size of the
Bank of England’s balance sheet today, and six times that in 2007.

This is the assumption used in the illustrative scenario in Section 3 of the Bank’s 2021 discussion paper
New forms of digital money | Bank of England, and reflects the share of UK deposits that is non interest
bearing.
2

Bank of England

Page 4

Sources: Individual central banks’ published data, IMF, Bank calculations.

Those are big numbers.
But they aren’t unprecedented in the history of central banking. In the UK, even the top
end of the range in Chart 1 would still leave the stock of publicly-provided means of
payment at around the levels seen in the mid-20th century (Chart 2). This underscores the
point that, while the technology for any future CBDC may be new, the use of the central
bank balance sheet to provide state-backed transactional money would not be: indeed, it
is one of the oldest functions of central banks.

Bank of England

Page 5

Sources: Bank of England, IMF.

2. Stablecoins that are truly stable may have much the same impact
As public authorities reflect on the case for CBDCs, private sector providers have been
developing so-called ‘stablecoins’, which claim to be pegged to the value of fiat currencies.
I say ‘claim’, because recent weeks have suggested such promises may be less than fully
credible. The value of TerraUSD – once one of the larger ‘stablecoins’ by market
capitalisation – fell to zero in just a few days. And Tether, sometimes asserted to be the
backbone of the cryptocurrency ecosystem, lurched precariously below parity for a period
(Chart 3). These gyrations have multiple causes. But ‘stable’ they are not. And the lack of
complete, real time, information on the assets backing the promise of convertibility,3
means that holders of such coins must accept at least the possibility of finding themselves
badly out of pocket.
Such ‘buyer beware’ warnings may be sufficient for coins that are only in niche use. But
they cannot be enough for any that reach systemic scale. And that is why the
Bank of England’s Financial Policy Committee has recommended that, in the UK, any
stablecoin that reaches systemic size should also meet standards equivalent to those

See eg Crypto industry shaken as Tether’s dollar peg snaps | Financial Times (ft.com); ‘We’re Not
Revealing Our Secret Recipe’, Tether’s CTO Says (bloomberglinea.com); and Whereabouts of Terra’s
Bitcoin Reserve a Mystery After Transfers - Bloomberg
3

Bank of England

Page 6

expected of commercial bank money.4 In practice that is likely to mean being issued by a
bank, or by a non-bank that: is subject to rigorous central bank regulation and
supervision;5 provides coinholders with a robust legal claim; is insolvency remote; and
transparently backs its coins with a precisely defined set of high quality and liquid assets.

Source: Bloomberg Finance L.P. Digital Asset Research, Inc.

It’s too soon to say what those assets should be. But, to take one example proposed by
some, if a systemic stablecoin were required to be fully backed by deposits at the central
bank, the implications for central bank balance sheets could be very similar to CBDC
(Chart 4). This would also be the case if a ‘narrow bank’ chose to issue its own tokenised
deposits and put all the proceeds into holdings at the central bank. Indeed, arguably any
stablecoin with a credible link to fiat currency relies ultimately on settlement in central bank
money. Of course, that does not mean that it is central bank money: even fully-backed,
regulated stablecoins would remain the liabilities of private sector companies, and hence
pose a range of risks not associated with CBDCs.

4

See Record of the Financial Policy Committee - 13 December 2019 (bankofengland.co.uk) and
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/financial-policy-summary-and-record/2022/march-2022
5
As proposed by the UK Treasury in O-S_Stablecoins_consultation_response.pdf
(publishing.service.gov.uk).

Bank of England

Page 7

3. Digital currencies may alter the transmission mechanism for monetary policy
A key unknown in assessing the impact of digital currencies lies in judging the extent to
which they may affect the flow, and pricing, of money and credit in the economy – which in
turn has implications for the transmission mechanism for monetary policy. When a bank
creates a new loan, it must retain or attract sufficient deposits to fund it.6 Digital currencies
do not fund credit creation, but they do increase the competition for, and hence the cost of,
deposits, with knock-on implications for the price and availability of credit.
The size of these effects will depend heavily on the eventual design of any systemic digital
currencies, their attractiveness relative to bank deposits, the availability and price of
alternative funding sources for banks, and borrowers’ ability to substitute between types of
credit. It is not a foregone conclusion that these effects will necessarily be large. Indeed,
an illustrative scenario published by the Bank of England in 2021 suggested that the
steady state impact could be quite modest, with lending rates rising only slightly, and credit
provision falling by a little over 1% – though varying the assumptions can generate
somewhat larger results (Chart 5).

6

See for example, ‘Money creation in the modern economy’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin 2014 Q1.

Bank of England

Page 8

Source: Bank of England Discussion Paper: “New Forms of Digital Money”

More serious disruption to credit supply could occur if deposits transferred into digital
currencies in an unexpectedly rapid or disorderly way, for example during a stress event.
But a range of design choices, including potential holding limits, could in principle be
deployed to deal with such situations. And banks suffering sudden deposit outflows may
also, as now, draw on market-wide central bank liquidity insurance facilities7 – though the
pricing of such facilities, and their implications for encumbrance, make them less well
suited to providing long-term structural support.
A particularly sensitive question is whether central banks may seek to use CBDCs, or
other forms of digital currency, to enhance monetary policy implementation – e.g. by
overcoming the effective lower bound to interest rates, or injecting liquidity directly into the
retail sector.8 But there is no sign that central banks are thinking of digital currencies in
this way. The Bank of England, for example, has stressed that any CBDC would
complement, not substitute for, physical cash.9

The Bank’s Index Linked Term Repo facility, for example, operates weekly, and allows all eligible
counterparties to bid for six month liquidity against the full range of eligible collateral (see Bank of England
Market Operations Guide: Our tools | Bank of England).
8
See, for example Securing macroeconomic and monetary stability with a Federal Reserve–backed
digital currency | PIIE
9
See for instance Innovation to serve the public interest - speech by Andrew Bailey | Bank of England
7

Bank of England

Page 9

4. Digital currencies may affect the way central banks deliver monetary control
Over and above any impact that digital currencies may have on the transmission
mechanism, they could also have implications for how central banks achieve ‘monetary
control’: i.e. ensuring that short term market rates are aligned with official rates chosen by
policy makers.10
Today, most central banks achieve this control by ensuring they at least meet banks’
demand for central bank reserves, and remunerate those reserves such that market rates
trade near or at the official rate. Other things equal, flows into digital currencies issued or
backed by the central bank, will drain reserves from the system. That could complicate
monetary control if it causes banks to bid up for reserves, pushing up on short term market
rates relative to official levels.
Such effects – ingloriously known as ‘autonomous factors’ in central banking jargon – are
nothing new. Increases in physical banknotes or government deposits, for example, also
drain reserves – and scaling that historical variation by the sort of estimates for CBDC size
shown in Chart 2 suggests that day to day variation in CBDC demand would not pose
materially greater uncertainty (the orange bars in Chart 6). Sharper and less predictable
inflows, e.g. during a period of stress – proxied in the purple bar in Chart 6 using the
extreme tail of existing autonomous flows – could however drive rather larger volatility.

Source: Bank of England, Bank calculations.

10

This issue, and others discussed in my remarks, are also well covered in this 2018 report by the Bank for
International Settlements’ Committees on Markets and Payment and Market Infrastructures: Central bank
digital currencies (bis.org).

Bank of England

Page 10

Whether this matters for monetary control depends on the level of reserves at the point
digital currencies are introduced, and the type of monetary control regime being operated.
As of today, most major central banks use so-called ‘floor’ systems, with a level of
reserves (injected via QE) that far exceeds most estimates of aggregate demand from the
banking system. With such abundant reserves, even quite large unexpected variations in
reserves holdings need not threaten monetary control (‘Zone A’ in Chart 7).

That may change as central banks unwind their QE holdings.11 As the aggregate level of
reserves falls, the chances of a sudden reserves drain pushing up on market rates
increase (‘Zone B’ in Chart 7). Of course no-one knows with any certainty where this
inflection point lies. So central banks must either aim to stop asset unwind well before that
point is reached (the approach announced by the FOMC), or have tools in place ready to
allow banks to replace the reserves depleted by asset sales/redemptions as and when
they need to (the approach we expect to take in the UK).12

In the UK, the Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) voted to begin balance sheet unwind in February
2022 – see Monetary Policy Report - February 2022 | Bank of England – and gave further detail on its
approach in its May Report: Monetary Policy Report - May 2022 | Bank of England.
12
See Waiting for the exit: QT and the Bank of England’s long-term balance sheet - speech by
Andrew Hauser | Bank of England
11

Bank of England

Page 11

None of this fundamentally changes the nature of the challenges facing central banks in
maintaining monetary control. But it does underscore the importance of reflecting
operational needs in the design of potential future digital currency frameworks.13
5. Digital currencies may alter the size and composition of central bank assets
Most of my remarks today have focused on the potential implications of digital currencies
for central bank liabilities. But of course, for every liability, there also has to be an asset.
Whether those assets are, in total, any larger than today depends, in part, on whether new
digital currencies cause a net increase in demand for central bank liabilities, or simply
substitute for reserves or banknotes. A narrow digital currency that largely cannibalised
banknote demand, for example, might have little or no impact. By contrast, a broad digital
currency with many attractive payments features could materially increase the demand for
central bank liabilities.
The impact of any increase in demand on the size and composition of central bank assets
depends on whether, and how, central banks choose to accommodate that demand. I’ve
already noted that, in systems like the UK’s, digital currencies may cause some banks
whose deposit bases have been partially disintermediated to increase their borrowing from
market-wide facilities. A more interesting case could arise if the central bank chooses
instead to back persistently higher demand with more long-lasting assets, for example to
reduce rollover risk. At modest size, that may look little different to today’s banknote
programmes. But if digital currencies took off at scale, careful thought would be needed
as to how best to structure such asset holdings to manage balance sheet risks, and
minimise any unintentional interference with other policy uses of the balance sheet.14
Conclusion
CBDCs, if adopted, would be the first new type of central bank liability for centuries. They
could have important implications for the size, composition and risk profile of our balance
sheets; for the monetary policy transmission mechanism, and for monetary control. We
need to understand these effects, and build them into the design of CBDCs and our
operational toolkits. But, by themselves, balance sheet considerations do not obviously
present any ‘redline’ arguments against CBDC adoption, if that is the chosen way forward.
Indeed, while the technologies for such currencies would be new, the use of the central

13

It is worth noting that, if digital currencies are not limited to primarily retail use, they could provide a conduit
for wholesale market participants to disintermediate money markets, driving rather more profound changes in
market functioning and bank funding.
14
This is just one aspect of a much wider set of questions about how to manage the touchpoints between
the much wider set of uses to which our future balance sheets will be put that central banks will face in the
years ahead, as discussed in: Bigger, broader, faster, stronger? How much should tomorrow’s central
bank balance sheets do - speech by Andrew Hauser | Bank of England

Bank of England

Page 12

bank balance sheet to provide state-backed transactional money is one of our most
longstanding functions. The dog may be old, but it can still perform new tricks!

I am very grateful to Joshua Jones and India Rimmer for their assistance in preparing
these remarks; and to Andrew Bailey, Sarah Breeden, Shiv Chowla, Rohan Churm,
Jon Cunliffe, Rafael Kinston, Jeremy Leake, Amber McAlone, Ali Moussavi, Huw Pill,
Dave Ramsden, Francine Robb, Christina Segal-Knowles and Cormac Sullivan for their
advice and comments.

