Lead Comment
On counterparty risk
Received (in revised form): 18th April, 2012

Andrew G. Haldane
is Executive Director, Financial Stability at the Bank of England. In this role, Andrew has responsibility for
developing Bank policy on financial stability issues and the management of the Financial Stability Area, and is
a member of the Bank’s new Financial Policy Committee. He is also a member of various international public
policy committees, economics associations, editorial boards and academic advisory committees. Andrew has
written extensively on domestic and international monetary and financial stability issues, authoring around
100 articles and three books.
Bank of England, Threadneedle Street, London EC2R 8AH, UK
E-mail: andy.haldane@bankofengland.co.uk

Abstract The financial crisis demonstrated the inadequacy of the management
of counterparty credit risk and the vulnerability of financial structures to
counterparty concerns. Three possible solutions are proposed to mitigate such
risks in the future: improved network visibility to understand credit chains; the
clearing of transactions centrally to improve transparency and reduce intrafinancial system debt; and building protection against counterparty default
through higher capital and margining requirements.
Keywords: counterparty risk, contagion, financial crises, systemic risk,
interbank markets

Consider the following thoughtexperiment. Imagine a set of banks,
indexed 1 to 100. Bank 1 lends US$100
to Bank 2. This is a private transaction in
the unsecured money market. Bank 2
then lends that US$100 on to Bank 3,
who in turn lends on to Bank 4, all the
way up to Bank 100.
This is a classic credit chain. In
principle, this credit chain seems to be
relatively robust. After all, net debt in the
financial system is only US$100, evenly
distributed across 100 institutions. Or,
put differently, each bank has on average
only US$1.00 of net debt. Risk is
well-spread, is it not?
It is not. This financial structure is an
inherently fragile one. Specifically, it
224

contains three distinct, but related,
structural fault-lines:1

† Counterparty risk is unmonitorable: In the
example, Bank 1’s ultimate counterparty
is Bank 100, but there are 99 intervening
links in the chain, 99 degrees of
separation and Bank 1 has no way of
knowing the identity of all those
counterparties to which it is exposed —
Banks 2– 100 in the credit chain. The
credit chain is largely invisible.
† Gross debt is unbounded: Although net
debt in this system is small, gross debt is
much larger and potentially unbounded.
Specifically, gross debt rises with the
number of links in the credit chain (n).

Journal of Risk Management in Financial Institutions Vol. 5, 3 224–226 Henry Stewart Publications 1752-8887 (2012)

On counterparty risk
In the example, gross debt is (n – 1)
US$100 ¼ US$9,900.
† Counterparty risk is unhedged: In the
example, because no collateral or capital is
held against exposures, a severing of any
link cascades along the credit chain. For
example, if Bank 100 falls, so too does
every other link in the chain. Aggregate
default would then be US$9,900, with
commensurately high deadweight costs.
The financial system is a domino line.

This financial structure is not a
hypothetical one. It broadly characterises
the unsecured money market during the
crisis and the identified structural
fault-lines were the very ones which
caused this market to suffer seizure
during the crisis. At root, these
fault-lines reflect failures in counterparty
risk management.
These pressures were not confined to
the money market. The same fault-lines
in counterparty risk management were
exposed in any number of core financial
markets during the crisis, from
plain-vanilla asset-backed securities to
exotic instruments. In each case,
counterparty concerns caused seizure. Of
the many crisis lessons learned, the
crippling impact of counterparty risk,
and the inadequacy of its pre-crisis
management, were among the most
important.
Against that background, this edition
of the Journal of Risk Management in
Financial Institutions explores counterparty
risk and the ways in which in the future
it might be better understood, priced
and managed. The thought-experiment
in the introduction provides a convenient
taxonomy of possible solutions to the
counterparty risk problem. It also
provides an organising framework for the
papers in this volume.

† Improving network visibility: Knowing your
counterparty is one thing. Knowing
your counterparties’ counterparties’
counterparty quite another. It was the
latter, higher-order, uncertainty that
killed financial markets during the crisis.
Such financial network opacity can only
be tackled by a fairly fundamental rethink
of the way in which financial transactions
are identified and recorded. Without
common identifiers — of counterparties,
transaction types, product attributes — it
is difficult to see how the network could
ever be navigated. Elsewhere, I have
called this the creation of a ‘common
language for finance’, the like of which
already exists for other well-performing
networks — for example, global supply
chains and the internet.2 The papers by
Grody, Hughes and Reininger and by
Krishna explore dimensions of, and
solutions to, this network opacity
problem.
† Central counterparty clearing: Another route
to improving network transparency, while
simultaneously reducing gross exposures
through netting, is to reconfigure the
financial network — for example, from
today’s spaghetti-junction configuration
to an ordered hub-and-spoke
configuration. A central counterparty is
the obvious mechanism for achieving
such a re-wiring. The G20 Heads of
State in 2009 committed the financial
world to central-clearing of a much
wider range of over-the-counter financial
products than in the past, but this will be
effective if, and only if, central
counterparties themselves have robust
counterparty risk management: who is
allowed to clear, what is to be cleared,
how is margin set and how are any
remaining risks managed and allocated?
The papers by Arnsdorf and by Murphy
analyse those questions. They are the

Henry Stewart Publications 1752-8887 (2012) Vol. 5, 3 224– 226 Journal of Risk Management in Financial Institutions

225

Haldane
same questions being addressed by the
official community.3 The stakes could
not be higher. Without adequate
answers, as the paper by Singh argues,
central counterparties risk themselves
becoming a new, more virulent, strain of
the systemic virus.
† Protecting against counterparty default: Not
all transactions, both derivative and cash
instruments, will be centrally cleared, but
for those instruments, counterparty risk
is no less a concern. That is why
on-going work by the official sector on
minimum margining requirements for
non-cleared trades is of such importance.
It is also why adequate capitalisation of
counterparty risk in non-collateralised
derivative transactions is important.
These so-called credit valuation
adjustments (CVA) were beefed-up under
Basel III.4 The paper by Rosen explores
the adequacy and calibration of CVA.

Taken together, these papers make
clear there is an enormous amount still
to be said and done before counterparty
risk is properly recognised and managed.
That is the bad news. The good news is
that the technological frontier of
counterparty risk management is being
pushed out by financial firms, central
counterparties and systemic risk
regulators. This is one silver lining from

226

the darkest of crisis clouds — even if
those clouds are yet to lift and even
though the technological frontier has
much further to travel.
# The Governor and Company of the

Bank of England, 2012

References and notes
1 For a discussion of the risk of maturity
mismatch in credit chains, see Hellwig,
M. (1995) ‘Systemic aspects of risk
management in banking and finance’,
Swiss Journal of Economics and Statistics,
Vol. 131, No. 4/2, pp. 723– 737.
2 Ali, R. D., Haldane, A. G. and
Nahai-Williamson, P. (2012) ‘Towards a
common financial language’, available at:
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/
publications/Documents/speeches/2012/
speech552.pdf (accessed 20th April, 2012).
3 See Committee on Payment and
Settlement Systems (CPSS) and the
Technical Committee of the International
Organization of Securities Commissions
(IOSCO) (2012) ‘Principles for financial
market infrastructures’, available at: http://
www.bis.org/publ/cpss101a.pdf (accessed
20th April, 2012).
4 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
(BCBS) (2011) ‘Basel III: A global
regulatory framework for more resilient
banks and banking systems’, available at:
http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs189_
dec2010.htm (accessed 20th April, 2012).

Journal of Risk Management in Financial Institutions Vol. 5, 3 224–226 Henry Stewart Publications 1752-8887 (2012)

