Bank of England
Mais Lecture – Press Conference
18th March 2014

Page 2
Mais Lecture Press Conference – 18 March 2014
Nils Blythe, Executive Director,
Communications:

So good evening, everyone. Thanks very much for coming,
and welcome to this short press conference following the
Governor’s speech. The usual rules apply; please do wait for
the microphone, and do say your name and the name of your
organisation before asking your question. So first question.
Richard?

Richard Edgar, ITV News:

Governor, you've announced a swathe of senior
appointments, 15 initiatives and even a mission statement.
Briefly, what’s the problem that all that is trying to fix?

Mark Carney, Governor:

Well I wouldn’t say it’s a problem. What we’re looking is to
take an opportunity. We’ve been given a wide range of new
powers and we’re going to deploy them to increase the public
good. And what does that mean? That means low, stable,
predictable inflation and it means strong, sustainable and
balanced growth. So we’re going to take the opportunity
that’s been given to us by the wide range of powers that we
have.

Ben Chu, The Independent:

Governor, in your speech you referenced the credit crisis and
also the forex and the Libor scandals. If this range of
institutional structures and powers which you've outlined had
been in place a decade or more ago, is it your view that those
events and abuses could have been prevented?

Mark Carney, Governor:

Well let me separate them, Ben. I think in terms of the credit
cycle and the credit crisis, certainly if we knew then what we
know today, and we had the powers and the organisational
structure that we’re putting in place, we would quite rightly
be expected to take action that would have moderated the
credit cycle.
Now the UK had its own challenges and problems, but it was
also hit by a global crisis. So we could have moved maybe
more towards Canadian outcomes, if I may, following that

Page 3
Mais Lecture Press Conference – 18 March 2014
crisis, and with less of a tail – a very severe tail, that we’ve
experienced over the course of the last five years, the true
stagnation that we’ve had over the last five years. And
certainly that’s what would be asked of this institution going
forward.
And let me make one other point related to that and then I’ll
move to conduct, which is that, and I made this point towards
the end of the speech, is that the global environment, for the
foreseeable future, has opportunities but actually is going to
be quite risky as well. And so we will continue to have risks
coming from abroad that we can prepare for, and to some
extent we can moderate the impact of those risks. But we
won’t be fully able to escape them and that’s why we need to
work abroad as well.
With respect to the market conduct issues, as you are well
aware the Bank is not responsible for market conduct, that’s
the responsibility of the FCA. What I think we can do with
respect to those issues, and we will do, and Minouche Shafik
will help lead this in her new Deputy Governor role, is that we
will look to change the infrastructure of markets – working
with market participants, working with other regulators, to
work to make sensible changes to the hard and soft
infrastructure of markets.
So let me give an example. We’re working right now through
the FSB, the Bank of England - Paul Fisher specifically - is
leading an effort to change the way benchmarks, fixes, are
calculated in FX markets. That’s changing the hard
infrastructure of those markets. But we also have to look at
softer issues in terms of principles around what are fair,
open, competitive markets, so that market participants
themselves recognise when certain behaviours are developing
in a way that undermine, effectively, the market system and
reduce the efficiencies that it brings.

Page 4
Mais Lecture Press Conference – 18 March 2014
Faisal Islam, Channel 4 News:

You said in the speech that it doesn’t take a genius to see
that similar risks exist today, as in the pre-crisis low rate
environment a decade ago. And I think in the Q&A you said
that there were some signs of excess returning. What are
you talking about there? And how would you reflect on the
government deciding to extend Help to Buy, which the Bank
of England have had some concerns with, and the current
account position as well which some market commentators
have had some concerns about?

Mark Carney, Governor:

Okay. There's a metapoint that I was making and it goes
back to my answer to Ben, and the conclusion of the speech,
talking about the international environment. Look, the risks
that are there because of the domestic outlook, the
international environment and the fact that a certain
conjuncture of risk and economic outcomes is likely to persist
for some time. In other words a relatively low for relatively
long rate environment, relative predictability of that, which is
an environment which we’ve seen in the past is conducive to
potentially complacency, particularly in financial markets, and
excessive risk taking.
That’s a reality. That’s a reality in terms of delivering one of
our core mandates, remits – the inflation target – so it is
setting policy in that environment so that we deliver the
inflation target. And if we only had one instrument, we would
be in a very difficult position. Obviously we have other
instruments, other tools and other responsibilities which can
help us through microprudential supervision, supervision of
banks, key intermediaries, and macroprudential measures to
guard against some of those risks.
Now you raised a number of them. Maybe I’ll just jump to
housing as one and then we’ll move on, if you don’t mind.
The FPC is very alert, as is the MPC, to the potential risks that
are created by this environment, in a recovering economy,
that vulnerabilities in the housing market could increase.

Page 5
Mais Lecture Press Conference – 18 March 2014
That’s why the FPC has acted - four major measures that we
announced in November.
Some of those are just coming into play now. The MMR, the
Mortgage Market Review standards for underwriting, are just
coming into effect next month officially actually. The stress
testing process is really just getting going and will run over
the course of this year. And so we’re going to monitor the
effectiveness of those.
We could take other measures. I don’t want to speculate on
any other measures that we could take. We actually have an
FPC meeting tomorrow, so I'm falling into purdah now, so I
won’t make any speculation except to observe that we’ve
taken measures in the past. If necessary we’ve outlined all
the other range of tools that we have as the FPC, and we
won’t have any hesitation to take the necessary steps, but
only at the right time and only in the right proportions.
China Business
Network:

So China doubled Chinese yuan’s trading band this week
against the US dollar, which is considered a sign of financial
liberalisation. But it has also raised concerns about possible
downside risk for investors. So do you think the concerns are
justified? And do you think Chinese yuan faces a more
substantial devaluation? Thank you.

Mark Carney, Governor:

Well the first element of that, certainly we welcome the move
by the PBOC. We welcome all measures that have been
taken, will be taken, to further the internationalisation of the
renminbi. We’re working closely with the PBOC, the
Treasury, others, in order to develop an offshore market in
renminbi here in London. And that will be an important
contribution, given that London is the leading international
financial centre, and the core destination for foreign exchange
trading. Over 40% of foreign exchange courses through

Page 6
Mais Lecture Press Conference – 18 March 2014
London. And this development will be a key element of the
internationalisation of the renminbi.
Look, investors in China face two-way risks, they face upside
and downside, just as they do in any other jurisdiction. And
it’s always timely to be reminded of that. And certainly in an
environment where there's potential for excessive risk taking,
I would just underscore that we welcome the PBOC’s move.
Sam Fleming, FT:

Thanks very much. Could I ask a bit about the new post?
Could you explain the background to this post? When was it
conceived and why did you decide it was necessary to create
a new Deputy Governor for banking and markets? Was it
effectively a knee jerk reaction to the forex scandal?

Mark Carney, Governor:

No. No is the short answer, and as you would have expected.
Look, we have been looking at our functions. We started the
planning process over six months ago, looking across all our
core functions. If you were paying attention to the speech,
what was core to that was the complementarities between the
various functions - how do we first isolate the specific
responsibilities, including markets, provision in markets,
management of our balance sheet, development of core
markets, not just from a market infrastructure perspective as
Ben was asking about, but also how core funding markets are
developing.
I mean these are fundamental changes to how the system is
going to work. And it’s a fundamental interface between the
Bank, the financial system and ultimately the global financial
system, but ultimately the UK real economy. And these are
things that we have to get right.
So we felt that for a variety of reasons, and I could have
stopped quite frankly at we have a 400 plus billion sterling
balance sheet - I could have started and stopped there as a
rationale to have a Deputy Governor that has that specific

Page 7
Mais Lecture Press Conference – 18 March 2014
responsibility. So this is something that we discussed, we
conceived of which is entirely consistent with the way we’re
assigning responsibilities, and looking to the senior executive,
the deputy governors, the governors as a group, to work
together to exploit those complementarities.
And the other aspect of that in terms of moving to a statutory
formalisation of that, we’re very pleased that the government
signalled that it will move forward to make this a statutory
post in due course.
Scott Hamilton, Bloomberg:

In relation to that new post, could you tell us a bit more
about the process of the appointment of Minouche? Was the
job advertised? Were there any other applicants? And if not,
why not?

Mark Carney, Governor:

There was a process, as you’re well aware, for the position for a Deputy Governor position of the Bank of England. There
was a wide range of highly qualified applicants for that
position. They were interviewed through a process led by the
Treasury. I was kept in the loop as was Court through Court
membership on that Committee.
Treasury was presented, we were presented with a unique
opportunity in the form of one of the most experienced
international policy makers in the world, in the form of
Minouche Shafik, a leading macro economist, an academic,
deep experience in managing organisations. So, you know,
we have managerial opportunities at the Bank and we’re
always looking to bolster our managerial capabilities.
And so we had a unique opportunity to bring somebody in
with international experience, with managerial experience,
who understands the interface between policy, who has
worked in some of the most difficult macro and
macrofinancial circumstances over the course of the latter

Page 8
Mais Lecture Press Conference – 18 March 2014
stages of the crisis, and of course certainly over the last three
years.
And the Committee, the Chancellor recommended her
appointment, Court and myself agreed with that, and we’re
all fortunate that she is coming back to the UK to fulfil this
role.
Ouida Taaffe, Financial World:

You mentioned shadow banking as an area of uncertainty.
Could you talk a little bit about differences of opinion, UK
versus US?

Mark Carney, Governor:

Okay, so your question on shadow banking, differences UK,
US. Two things. The point I was trying to get across, the
first point, is that there are quite major differences in the
structure of shadow banking. You look at the US versus the
UK; one big difference is the predominance of money market
funds in the US and the shadow banking chain that money
market funds drive.
So the reforms to money market funds - floating NAV, gates,
other aspects are really - they are fundamental in the US,
whereas they are of interest in the UK. We are in the process
of, as the FPC - and again I'm going to appeal to purdah here
- we’re in the process of reviewing the risks in shadow
banking in the UK. We produce a sort of regular annual report
on those risks.
At the end of this year, through the FSB process – an
international process, all the major jurisdictions will be
reporting in on both the risks that they see, and the steps
that they intend to take to mitigate those risks. But they will
be very tailored, and I think what we’re going to see is
several years of iteration around measures that we
individually and collectively take.

Page 9
Mais Lecture Press Conference – 18 March 2014
Nils Blyth:

Great. Now I'm afraid that is all we’ve got time for. There
are a lot of guests waiting for us, so thank you all very much
indeed.

Mark Carney, Governor:
END

Okay, great. Thanks.

