Policy Dilemmas
Speech given by
Kate Barker, Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England

19 February 2008

I would like to thank Tracy Wheeler and Fabrizio Zampolli for research assistance, and others for
helpful comments. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank
of England or other members of the Monetary Policy Committee.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Good evening.
It is a great pleasure for me to have been invited to give this speech tonight. Many of
you will be aware that this is where I grew up and opportunities to return are welcome
– not least in order to replenish my supplies of oatcakes. Indeed, the item of most
interest to me last week on the Today programme was the debate on the oatcake shop.
It is however nearly thirty years since I last lived here - years of great economic
change. I moved away just before the recession of the early 1980s, which took
claimant count unemployment in Stoke-on-Trent to 15,500 in 1983. Since then,
unemployment has fluctuated strongly, with the claimant count falling to 5,500 in
1989, and then rising again to 12,500 three years later.

Today unemployment is just 4,000, or 2.8% on the claimant count. 17.5% of jobs are
in manufacturing, well above the UK average of 11%, but down from over 30% in
1995. However, the service sector has been growing strongly, adding 1,500 jobs
annually on average over the past 10 years. Alongside this expansion, regeneration is
now underway in several parts of the City, and I know there is a real determination to
build long-term success.

The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) plays a major role in providing the right
economic background to enable this success. We all learned in the 1970s and 1980s
that allowing inflation to be high and unstable ultimately brought all the economic
and social costs associated with significant downturns. Since inflation targeting was
adopted in 1992, the UK’s annual growth rate has not fallen below 1.5%. This period
of growth stability, combined with an inflation rate which has so far only once since
1997 moved more than 1 percent away from the Government’s target, has enabled the
MPC to build the credibility of the target, and widespread support for an independent
central bank.

But, as Committee members have frequently stressed, there are limits to what we can
achieve. Shocks inevitably occur which drive the economy away from the path of
steady growth and low inflation for a time. At present we are faced with a number of
significant shocks, most notably the ongoing uncertain conditions in credit markets,
rising oil and commodity prices and a sharp fall in the exchange rate.

1

As these various shocks play out in the domestic economy, it is highly likely that for a
period output growth, and more particularly inflation, will prove volatile. The
perceived uncertainty resulting from this volatility may well be reinforced by the
varying outlook for the components of demand.

This evening I will set out how and why the balance of growth in the economy is
likely to be changing, look at downside risks to the overall rate of output growth
(particularly from the credit and property markets), consider upside risks to inflation
and finally draw these themes together with some reflections on the balance of risks.

Changing balance of economic growth
Over the past decade, overall growth in the economy averaged an annual 2.9%1,
household consumption growth was 3.3%, business investment growth 5.8% and net
trade made an average negative contribution of 0.5 percentage points. Unemployment
declined from 7.1% in 1997 to 5.5% in 2007 (on the ILO measure).

This pattern of economic growth was unlikely to continue indefinitely. A particular
vulnerability is the worsening external trade position on goods and services, which
was being offset by an overall favourable rate of return on UK investment abroad
relative to that on UK foreign-owned investment. Latest data suggest that the latter
has been eroded – the current account deficit for the first three quarters of 2007
averaged 4.9% of GDP. This, together with the recent sharp fall in the exchange rate,
suggests that an adjustment of the economy towards exports growth outstripping
imports, should now be in prospect. This means that exports should be supported
despite slowing overseas demand, if the decline in the exchange rate were to be
sustained. In turn this would tend to support business investment.

At the same time, household debt rose rapidly. For many households their asset
holdings have also increased, due in large part to the nominal 211% rise in house
prices since 1997, with the house-price/earnings ratio almost doubling. While the
sustainable house-price/earnings ratio has probably risen over this period, even taking

1

Average growth rates from Q1 1997 to Q3 2007.

2

into account the fall in long-term real interest rates and easing in credit conditions
(until the recent past) the scale of this increase is difficult to justify.

Other factors behind the economic changes of the last decade or so were also likely to
come to an end at some point. In particular this applies to the fall in the rate of
unemployment consistent with stable inflation, and the decline in real long-term
interest rates (Chart 1). These trends tended to support higher levels of household
borrowing, and may have come to an end at the same time as real household income
growth is being squeezed. Households might well have extrapolated the strong trend
in average real labour income growth during the early years of the MPC (until around
2004) as being permanent. Since then, real incomes have grown less strongly, and as
this is now likely to persist for a time, households may be revising down their income
expectations - and household spending may slow further as savings are increased.
Together with the impact of tighter credit conditions, this accounts for the weakness
in consumer spending expected in the Bank’s latest Inflation Report.2

Expectations of rebalancing are also reflected in equity price movements by sector.
Equity prices overall were perhaps surprisingly resilient in the autumn of 2007. But
as the financial market turmoil has proved prolonged, and it has become clear that the
central banks are not able and/or willing to offset the whole impact of credit
tightening on output, equity markets have both weakened and become more volatile.

By the end of last week, since the turmoil began in early August, the Standard and
Poors 500 in the US had fallen by 10%, and the UK FTSE All-Share by 10.5%. Some
sectors had performed more strongly – for example in the UK oil, gas and utilities
sector had risen slightly over the whole period, while basic materials were up by 28%.
While the industrial sector had fallen by 15%, the financial sector had been
particularly weak, down 23% and consumer services down 19%. Property had
performed poorly, with the real estate sector down 22% and the housebuilders sector
down 47%.

2

Bank of England (2008).

3

Downside risks to growth and inflation
With a variety of shocks affecting the economy, it is unsurprising that there is also a
wide range of risks. On the downside, the risk I believe to be of most concern is
around the interplay between the property market and the financial sector resulting
from the credit turmoil. There are clear signs of a marked weakening in both the
commercial and residential property markets. Commercial property prices fell by
12% in the second half of 2007, and latest data from the major lenders suggest that
house prices declined slightly over the three months to January.

While the outlook for house prices is always highly uncertain, it is likely that prices
will decline in the short-term relative to earnings, and falls in nominal terms cannot be
ruled out. An added uncertainty is whether consumers might respond proportionately
more to downside news on house prices than to upside. There is only one recent
study of which I am aware that investigates such asymmetric behaviour in the UK.3
This concludes that there was no significant tendency for spending to respond more to
falling house prices than to rising. Indeed, to the extent that the large rise in house
prices over the past decade has resulted in high levels of housing equity, there should
be ample opportunity to borrow against housing equity for many even if house prices
were to fall – in general the level of housing equity may be more important than the
direction of change in house prices. It is worth noting that it has been calculated, on a
very pessimistic assumption of a fall in house prices of 15%, that only 5% of
mortgagors (around 2% of total households) would find themselves in negative equity
(Chart 2)4. The constraint in present circumstances is more likely to be whether or
not lenders are willing to meet the demand for borrowing.

More important risks relate to the effects of the credit market tightening, including the
risk that some less high quality borrowers reaching the end of two year fixed-rate
mortgages during 2008 may find that they have to re-finance onto the much higher
standard variable rate. The impact of this could be very significant for those
households, but should not be so for the economy as a whole.

3

Disney, Gathergood and Henley (2007).
The calculations in Chart 2 are based on the 2007 NMG Survey reported by Waldron and Young
(2007).
4

4

The most significant, but less likely, downside risks are those associated with the
linkages between the financial sector and the property market. A prolongation of the
present difficulties in accessing wholesale funds could restrict the quantity of
mortgage lending during 2008. In this case the mortgage market could become less
competitive and more expensive, feeding back into a decline in the housing market,
somewhat lower consumer spending, and also into lenders’ balance sheets, reducing
lending capacity further. A similar risk exists with regard to commercial property and
the balance sheets of both borrowers and lenders. If these risks were to crystallise to
any great extent, there would be clear potential for much weaker output growth as
reduced credit availability would adversely affect both consumption and companies’
ability to invest. This would also tend to result in lower inflation in the medium term
than the MPC’s present central projection. It is for this reason that the MPC will
continue to monitor property and financial markets closely.

Factoring large risks into the monthly policy decisions is not easy. In some instances,
such as a sharp fall in exchange rate, the MPC is likely to have sufficient time after
the risk has emerged to offset the consequences, as the inflation response feeds
through only over a period. However, if credit tightening were to prove more severe
than in the MPC’s present central projection, leading to a significant fall in lending to
households and companies, this could prompt a further decline in property values.
The consequent adverse impact on growth could prove difficult to turn around
quickly, potentially resulting in a protracted period of low output growth and belowtarget inflation. This would argue for giving this risk some weight in decisions now.

This would be consistent with the MPC’s remit which invites us, subject to achieving
the Government’s target for inflation, to support the Government’s objectives for
growth and employment. There are circumstances in which undue volatility in
growth, either up or down, should be avoided, provided (a vital proviso) this seems
likely to prove consistent with achieving the inflation target over the medium-term.
While there is no long-run trade-off between growth and inflation, in the short term
there may be choices between different paths for the economy. The aim is to strike
the right balance between limiting the social and economic costs associated with
output volatility, given the overriding goal of ensuring that inflation does not move
away from target for a prolonged period.
5

Upward risks to inflation
Unfortunately, the strong upward inflation pressures in the UK today make it difficult
to argue for large reductions in Bank Rate to reduce this downward risk. Higher
global prices, particularly for energy and food, are still feeding through the supply
chain, amply illustrated by the sharp rises in producer price inflation in January, both
for input and output prices. Including the estimated impact of the announced rises in
domestic energy bills, CPI inflation is expected to be considerably above the 2%
target for much of the rest of 2008. There is little that monetary policy can now do to
dampen this peak. In addition, the fall in the sterling exchange rate, down over 8%
since just before the credit market turmoil began in August 2007, will, if sustained,
tend to push up on consumer prices throughout the forecast period as importers and
their customers adjust.

A period of above-target inflation, driven primarily by global factors, is not
necessarily a concern. Indeed, the rise in CPI inflation last year was weathered
successfully, in so far as neither pay settlements nor average earnings picked up to the
same extent. Will a second year of squeeze on real earnings produce greater upward
pay pressure? There is not, as yet, very much evidence on this year’s pay round. The
Bank’s Agents survey on pay around the turn of the year was reassuring, and did not
suggest that inflation would put particularly strong upward pressure on pay in 2008.
And there is a background of greater economic uncertainty which may limit pay
pressures as wage bargainers become more concerned about employment prospects.
The GfK consumer confidence survey suggests that households are not very confident
in the future of the economy - even though they remain reasonably confident about
their own situation. Unemployment has been quite stable in recent months and
employment has picked up, but the trend in business surveys for future employment
has generally been down over the last quarter.

However, it is not clear what rate of increase in average earnings would give rise to
concern in present circumstances. A figure of 4.5% is often cited in this context – for
example a comment in the latest Institute for Fiscal Studies Green Budget: “The Bank
of England believes that pay increases of around 4.5% across the whole economy

6

would be consistent with the inflation target.”5 This figure, which was cited in a
number of Inflation Reports in 1997 and 1998, was certainly never intended to be a
guide for every situation, but rather a rough guide to what average earnings increase
over a longer period would be consistent with achieving the inflation target, assuming
that annual productivity growth remained close to 2%6. Within this average,
individual settlements will of course reflect the particular conditions of demand and
supply.

In the short term, variations in productivity growth and in other costs need to be taken
into account. At present, increases in energy and other imported costs imply less
scope for labour cost increases, and therefore suggests that wage inflation needs to be
lower than average for a period relative to inflation, and possibly also in money terms,
to be consistent with the inflation target in the medium term.

The immediate outlook for wages is only part of a wider concern about the overall
picture for UK inflation expectations. The central projection in the latest Inflation
Report makes it clear it is more likely than not that over this summer CPI inflation
will reach the level where an open letter from the Governor will be triggered for only
the second time. Not too much significance should be attached to this. When the
MPC was first established, it was suggested, on the basis of recent past experience,
that these open letters would be quite frequent7. In fact, there were few large supply
side shocks in the first decade of the MPC, and inflation was kept within one per cent
either side of the target in all but one month. But the recent sequence of shocks
stemming from oil and commodity prices, and the exchange rate, inevitably leads to
greater short-term inflation volatility. Open letters may well become more frequent.
Indeed, were energy prices to fall back sharply in the next twelve months, there would
be a risk of an open letter because CPI inflation is too far below target.

The real concern is whether this renewed bout of inflation well above target could
spark off a lasting rise in inflation expectations that posed a serious risk to keeping
5

IFS Green Budget 2008.
For details on the impact of the change in inflation target on this estimate see Nickell (2003).
7
Bean (1998) suggests inflation would deviate from target by more than the 1pp required to trigger an
open letter more than 40% of the time.
6

7

CPI inflation on target. If this occurred, it could be very costly to reverse. Certainly
at the moment many of the short-term indicators are worrying – household inflation
expectations in the Bank’s own survey rose in late 2007, and picked up quite sharply
in the Citigroup survey in early 2008. Business surveys also indicate that short-term
expectations for output prices are unusually strong - for example the Chartered
Institute of Purchasing Survey for the services sector shows price expectations the
fourth highest since the survey began.

These indicators are probably not very informative about where inflation will settle in
the medium-term. They can be volatile – for example services price expectations
dropped back quite sharply during 2007. But household inflation expectations
remained high in late 2007 despite the fallback in CPI, possibly influenced by
inflation remaining high as measured by the RPI. If that is the case, they may fall
back later this year. In 2001, inflation perceptions from the GfK survey fell back
quite sharply with RPI inflation, although this has not invariably occurred (Chart 3).
And RPI inflation could weaken relative to CPI in 2008 if house prices were to
remain weak. Nevertheless, the strength of short-term upward inflation pressures
indicates a very real risk that those involved in price and wage setting may
persistently have inflation expectations too high to be consistent with the CPI target.

Conclusions on the balance of risks
It may have been inevitable that the largely favourable economic backdrop to
monetary policy of the first ten years would not prove permanent, but the precise
combination of shocks experienced since August 2007 was obviously unexpected.
Today I have discussed the likelihood that the near term outlook is for a rather
different balance of growth in the economy than the recent past, with consequently
varying pressures on the companies represented here. Such a re-balancing is not
unexpected or unwelcome – but as last week’s Inflation Report made clear, it is likely
to take place within the context of an overall sharp slowdown in output growth.

Policy decisions at present are unusually dependent on judgements about risks to the
central projection. Monetary policy is not able to prevent either the short-term
inflation peak, or arguably do very much to improve financial markets liquidity and
credit supply. So our judgements are about offsetting the potential effects of these
8

developments on medium-term inflation, in the context that the risks of an outturn
considerably above or below target in the medium term are both unusually high. My
chief concern is the significant possibility of a large downside risk to growth, and
therefore to inflation, as the impact of the credit tightening works through the
economy. I rate this a little higher than a large upside risk to inflation over the
medium-term from dislodging inflation expectations on the upside. And the change
in credit conditions themselves means that any given level of Bank Rate is somewhat
more restrictive. However, while this might suggest an immediate case for lowering
interest rates further, it is not compelling. After all, at the end of 2007 the level of
activity in the economy was still judged to be a little above trend – and the slowdown,
which the MPC thought necessary last August to keep inflation at target, has only just
got underway. At the same time, the upward inflation pressures have continued to
build and over the next few months it is likely to be higher inflation, not slower
growth, which is the dominant story in the data.

In addition, despite the warning signals from credit conditions surveys, the overall
tone of the economic data so far is still quite positive. Beyond the property markets,
there are no clear signs of a downturn. Retail sales may have been weak in
December, but a full picture of consumer resilience around the turn of the year is not
yet available. And a more positive forward scenario can be painted. If the US
economy responds positively and quickly to the policy stimulus there, then alongside
continued robust growth in Asia, this might help to improve financial market
confidence and produce an outcome for growth stronger than the central projection.

Over the next few months I will be monitoring credit conditions, including the ability
of financial institutions to gain access to finance, asset prices and inflation
expectations in order to assess how the likelihood of the different risks is shifting.
Judgements about the correct policy response may need to be unusually flexible, with
much more uncertainty than normal around the future path of policy rates. This will
mean a major challenge in communicating clearly how the evidence is informing our
judgements, and how we are responding in order to fulfil our determination to keep
inflation on target in the medium-term.

9

References:

Bank of England (2008), Inflation Report, February.

Bean, C (1998), ‘The new UK monetary arrangements: A view from the literature’,
The Economic Journal, Vol 108, No.451, pages1795-1809.

Disney, R, Gathergood, J and Henley A (2007), ‘House price shocks, negative
equity and household consumption in the United Kingdom’, Nottingham University,
unpublished working paper,
http://www.nottingham.ac.uk/economics/staff/details/papers/r.disney_house-priceshocks.pdf.

The Institute for Fiscal Studies (2008), ‘The IFS Green Budget’, January.

Nickell, S (2003), ‘Two current monetary policy issues’, available at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2003/speech202.pdf

Waldron, M and Young, G (2007), ‘Household debt and spending: results from the
2007 NMG Research survey’ Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin 2007 Q4, pages
512-521.

10

Chart 1: UK 10-year real forward rates

Chart 2: Illustrative distribution of housing
equity with lower house prices
Per cent

6
5

NMG 2007
Percentage of
NMG 2007 with house prices 5% lower
mortgagors
NMG 2007 with house prices 10% lower
NMG 2007 with house prices 15% lower
BHPS 1995

4

50
40
30

3
20

2
10

1
0

0
1985

1990

1995

2000

<0k

2005

Note: Real forward rates derived from index linked
government bonds
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations

80
70

Per cent
(a)
GfK Inflation
perceptions (LHS)

RPI (RHS)

5
4

60
50

3

40
2

30
20
10
0
Sep-95

1

CPI (RHS)

Sep-98

Sep-01

Sep-04

50k100k
Housing equity (£'s)

100k200k

200k+

Sources: BHPS, NMG Research survey and Bank
calculations.

Chart 3: Inflation and inflation perceptions
Balance

0k-25k 25k-50k

0
Sep-07

(a) Net balance believing consumer prices to have increased
over the past 12 months.

Note: Data show the three-month moving average.
Sources: Bank of England, GfK NOP and ONS

11

