Practical Issues in the UK Monetary Policy, 2000-2005
Speech given by
Stephen Nickell, Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England and
Professor at the London School of Economics

At the British Academy Keynes Lecture in London
20 September 2005

British Academy Keynes Lecture, to be presented at the British Academy on 20 September, 2005. I
am most grateful to Jumana Saleheen for her valuable help in the preparation of this paper, and to
Kate Barker, Mervyn King, Jumana Saleheen, David Smith, David Walton and members of the
audience at the British Academy for comments on an earlier draft.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

1
Practical Issues in UK Monetary Policy, 2000-2005
Summary
I consider three topics. First, the rise in household debt and its implications for
monetary policy. Second, the role of asset prices in monetary policy. Third, the
implications of the switch in the inflation target at the end of 2003.
The conclusions are as follows. The driving force behind the dramatic rise in
household debt over the last thirty years is the continuing rise in owner-occupied
dwellings and in the proportion of households with a mortgage. More recently, the
rapid rise in house prices has also been important. Interestingly enough, the overall
rise in household debt over the last eight years has not had a big impact on
consumption growth because, over the same period, there has also been a significant
increase in the rate of accumulation, by households, of financial assets. Finally, while
it is possible that higher levels of debt may make household consumption more
sensitive to interest rate changes, this may easily be offset simply by moderating these
same changes.
Concerning the role of asset prices in monetary policy, here we have analysed the
implications of the 2002-4 UK housing boom. The overall conclusions are first, it is
impossible to tell whether or not there has been a house price bubble in the light of the
fall in UK long-term real interest rates from around 4% in the mid 1990s to around
2% by 2000. Second, to have any significant impact on the housing boom, the MPC
would have had to raise interest rates by around 300 basis points for three years from
late 2002. This would have cut GDP growth by a little over 1/2% in 2003. Third, it is
impossible to say, at the moment, whether or not such a policy would have been
worth doing in order to reduce the size of the subsequent housing market crash. Since
no crash has yet been observed, currently it seems unlikely that the “bubble pricking”
policy would have been sensible, ex post. And, who knows, if the MPC had raised
interest rates by 300 basis points in 2002, sterling might truly have risen to
unsustainable levels!

2
Finally, the switch from a 2.5% inflation target on the RPIX measure to a 2.0%
inflation target on the CPI (HICP) measure, at the end of 2003, turned out to have
minimal implications for monetary policy. Furthermore, the CPI is a marginally
superior cost of living index relative to the RPIX.
1. Introduction
This being the Keynes Lecture, a discussion of the practicalities of UK
macroeconomic policy seems particularly apposite. This lecture deals with some of
the topics on which the Bank of England Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has
spent a lot of time since I became a member in June 2000. Interestingly enough, these
topics would typically not occupy much space in a text book on monetary economics.
The three topics on which I shall focus are as follows. First, the rapid rise in
household debt and its implications for monetary policy. Second, the role of asset
prices in monetary policy with particular reference to the recent UK housing boom.
Third, the implications of the switch in the inflation target at the end of 2003.
Before moving on to the details, it is worth briefly noting how the MPC operates in
the UK. We have a specific inflation target set by the Chancellor of the Exchequer
which we are required to meet at all times. The target is symmetric in the sense that
being below target is just as bad as being above target. To hit the inflation target we
focus on a period between 12 months and 30 months into the future. We generate an
MPC forecast every three months, conditioning on market expectations of the Bank of
England’s official interest rate (the market curve). If this produces forecasts such that
inflation has a relatively high probability of moving significantly above (below)
target, we tend at some stage to raise (lower) rates above (below) those implied by the
market curve.
The interest rate decision is produced monthly and is based on majority voting within
the MPC, with the minutes providing an explanation and details of individual votes 13
days after the decision. We also publish the forecast every three months with detailed
explanation in the Inflation Report.

3
Members of the MPC are individually responsible for their own decisions and have to
be prepared to justify their voting record under public questioning from the House of
Commons Treasury Select Committee. Members of the MPC are also expected to
explain their own thinking in various national and regional fora on a regular basis.
This procedure for setting interest rates in the UK differs from the rules for good
monetary policy making set out in Svensson (1999), although not dramatically. In
particular, the MPC forecast is not conditioned on estimates of its own optimal future
interest rate path but instead on estimates of the market expectations of the Bank’s
future interest rate path. However, the MPC operates in an open and transparent
fashion which is probably more important than not following fully optimal
procedures.
2. Household Debt and Consumption
I joined the MPC in June 2000, and almost from that moment it is clear, ex-post, that
the UK economy started gradually to slow. But while the US and the German
economies were contracting for most of 2001, the UK economy did not contract for a
single quarter and the UK unemployment rate was the same at the end of 2001 as it
was at the end of 2000. UK monetary policy was significantly relaxed during 2001
and so despite falling investment and a weakening world economy, domestic demand
continued to expand steadily so that overall growth rates remained positive. Some
commentators, however, argue that the relative stability of UK GDP growth during
the course of a significant recession in the world’s major economies (US, Germany,
Japan) was only achieved at some cost. For example, Fred Harrison notes that
“Encouraged by low interest rates, people went on a spending spree. They reduced
savings and extracted equity from their homes to fuel a consumption boom”(The
Observer, 27 March 2005). Again looking back, Hamish McRae in The Independent
in early 2005 (16 March) states that, “What is, however, clear is that the credit-fuelled
spending boom is, one way or another, coming to an end”.
The common themes are clear, booming consumption and rapidly expanding debt.
Indeed, for years the rising debt to income ratio in the UK has caused significant
concern. Philip Thornton’s remarks in mid-2003 are typical, “Britons piled on an all-

4
time record amount of debt last month, triggering fears that consumers have
embarked on an unsustainable borrowing binge that will end in a crash reminiscent
of the early 1990s”, The Independent, 30 July 2003.
These arguments are commonplace, indeed have probably developed into the received
wisdom about the first few years of the 21st century. Namely, UK macroeconomic
policy enabled the UK economy to miss out on recession by generating a house price
bubble and an associated credit-fuelled spending boom. In what follows we shall,
among other things, argue that there has not been a spending boom, the non-spending
boom was not credit-fuelled and there has probably not been a house price bubble. In
this section, we focus on the first two of these leaving our analysis of house prices to
the next section.
The Non-Existent Household Spending Boom of 2000-2003
In Fig.1, we show quarterly consumption growth in the UK from 1996 to the end of
2003. Over the period of the supposed consumption boom in 2000-2003, we see that
average quarterly consumption growth was 0.77%1 , very close to the average over
the last twenty five years (0.72%) and well below average consumption growth in the
previous period (1996-99) which was 1.03%. Furthermore, as we can see from Fig.2,
from 1998 to the end of 2003, the proportion of post-tax income that was consumed
was relatively flat, hardly evidence of a debt fuelled consumption boom2.
Nevertheless, as we can also see in Fig.2, mortgage equity withdrawal (MEW) plus
unsecured credit growth rose from around 2% of post-tax household income in 1998
to over 10% in 2003. So there was indeed a significant rise in the rate of household
debt accumulation from 1998 to 2003 despite the fact that the ratio of consumption to
post-tax income remained stable throughout. So what was going on?
The relationship between consumption, debt and post-tax income
First, let us look at the mechanical relationship between the consumption, post-tax
income and debt of households. The basic identity is 3
Consumption ≡

Post Tax Income
- Net Acquisition of Financial Assets
- Net Acquisition of Housing Assets
+ Net Acquisition of Financial Liabilities

5

This simply says that in aggregate, post-tax income plus new debt can be spent either
on consumption or on houses or on financial assets. So where does MEW come into
the story? First, financial liabilities can be divided into secured and unsecured. Then
MEW is defined by
MEW =

Net Acquisition of Secured Financial Liabilities
- Net Acquisition of Housing Assets

So if we add the net increase in unsecured debt to MEW, we get the net acquisition of
financial liabilities less the net acquisition of housing assets. This is sometimes
known as lending “available” for consumption. But as Fig. 2 has shown, while it may
be available for consumption, it is not necessarily used for this purpose because some
of it goes towards an increase in the rate of acquisition of financial assets.
Let us look at the facts. First, rewrite the basic identity as
Consumption = 1 – NA Financial Assets – NA Housing Assets
PT Income
PT Income
PT Income
+ NA Financial Liabilities
PT Income
(NA = Net Acquisition, PT = Post-Tax)
So to understand how consumption changes relative to post-tax income, we need to
look at the net acquisition of financial assets, housing assets and financial liabilities,
all relative to post-tax income. In Table 1, we see that the net acquisition of housing
assets has risen gradually relative to post-tax income since the early 1990s. This term
consists basically of the purchase of newly built houses and the money spent on home
improvements. Houses purchased by one household from another household cancel
out and so make no contribution. The net acquisition of financial liabilities, which
simply refers to the accumulation of household debt, increased gradually during the
mid-1990s but more than doubled from 1998 to 2003. Interestingly enough, the rate
at which households accumulated financial assets increased rapidly from exactly the
same date, also more than doubling from 1998 to 2003. In a mechanical sense, this is
why consumption has not risen as a share of household post-tax income over this

6
period. During this period when the rate of household debt accumulation has been
rising rapidly, the rate of household financial asset accumulation has also been rising
rapidly. So is this just a happy accident, or are there reasons why the accumulation of
debt and assets might be related? The first point to note is that it seems unlikely that
the households which are accumulating this extra debt are the same households which
are accumulating the extra financial assets. Indeed, we know that most of the new
debt is secured on houses (see the last two columns in Table 1) so a good part of it
will be associated with the accumulation of housing assets by individual households.
In aggregate, on the other hand, this is not the case because most house purchases
simply involve one household buying a house from another household, with little net
accumulation of housing assets in aggregate.
So any possible systematic connection between debt accumulation and financial asset
accumulation will typically involve more than one household. An obvious example is
when a household takes out a substantial mortgage to purchase a house from a lasttime seller who has no mortgage and is either moving into rented accommodation
(e.g. an old peoples’ home) or has received the property as an inheritance. In either
case it is entirely plausible that the seller will invest the money from the sale of the
property in financial assets and we see a direct correspondence between the increase
in household debt generated by the buyer and the accumulation of financial assets by
the seller. Furthermore, as house prices rise, we can expect both debt accumulation
and financial asset accumulation to be bigger in each transaction of this type.
So it is clear from this example that some housing transactions will generate both net
increases in debt and net increases in asset accumulation. Interestingly enough this
example involves mortgage equity withdrawal because there has been an increase in
aggregate secured debt and no aggregate housing investment. So here we have an
example of mortgage equity withdrawal which does not involve additional
consumption. Of course, there are other housing transactions which lead directly to
both mortgage equity withdrawal and increased consumption. The obvious example
is where households simply borrow more by raising the mortgage on their existing
property. But it is important to recognise that the majority of mortgage equity
withdrawal is not of this type and leads not to increased consumption but to increased
financial asset accumulation (see Benito and Power, 2004 for more detail). That is

7
why the rates of accumulation of financial liabilities and of financial assets have risen
together, leaving the proportion of post-tax household income which is consumed
remarkably stable in recent years (note that the savings rate in 1998/9 was 5.6% and
in 2003 it was 5.4%).
So to summarise, what we have seen is first, the average quarterly growth rate of real
consumption over the period 2000-2003 has been almost exactly equal to the average
growth rate over the last twenty five years, so there was no consumption boom.
Second, from 1998 to 2003 the proportion of their post-tax income which has been
consumed by households has been stable, despite the fact that mortgage equity
withdrawal plus unsecured credit has grown from 2 per cent of post-tax income to
nearly 10 per cent of post-tax income over the same period. Third, these two
apparently inconsistent facts are reconciled by the fact that since 1998, the increasing
rate of accumulation of debt by households has been closely matched by the
increasing rate of accumulation of financial assets. Furthermore, this is not an
accident. There are good reasons why aggregate secured debt accumulation and
aggregate financial asset accumulation might be related, particularly in a period of
rapidly rising house prices. Finally, therefore, there is no strong relationship between
aggregate consumption growth and aggregate debt accumulation.4 In the light of
these facts, should the level of household debt have any impact on monetary policy?
High Levels of Debt and Monetary Policy
In the MPC minutes of October 2002, the first reason for leaving interest rates
unchanged was “Domestic demand was still quite resilient and the economy was
growing close to potential. An interest rate reduction seemed likely at present
predominantly to affect house prices, household borrowing and consumption which
were already increasing strongly. A further reduction in the repo rate risked creating
an unsustainable increase in debt which might subsequently unwind sharply. This
would increase the risk of undershooting the inflation target in the medium term”. I
did not accept this view and voted for a rate cut. As I noted in Nickell (2003a), “Since
the most likely outcome was for inflation to undershoot the target throughout 2004,
albeit by a small margin, I judged that it was better to institute a small cut in rates
rather than hold off for fear of exacerbating problems of uncertain magnitude yet
further into the future”.

8

To pursue the issue of debt and monetary policy further, it is helpful to have some
background on household debt in the UK. In 1975, household debt was around 38%
of household post-tax income. By 2004, this had risen to around 125%. Currently,
over four-fifths of household debt is secured on property, ie. consists of mortgages,
and around 95% of all household debt is held by mortgagors (see May et al., 2004).
The driving force behind the dramatic rise in household debt over the last thirty years
has been the continuing rise in the number of owner-occupied dwellings and in the
proportion of households with a mortgage. Other factors lying behind the rise in
secured debt include the reduction in the “front end loading” of mortgage repayments
as inflation and nominal interest rates have fallen, leading to higher loan to income
ratios for first-time buyers, as well as the significant increase in house prices relative
to incomes in recent years. This latter has led to higher mortgages relative to incomes
and will continue to do so as lower “old mortgages” get replaced by higher “new
mortgages”. This process will go on for many years unless there is a dramatic fall in
house prices, so that debt to income ratios will continue to rise to ever higher levels.
So why should high debt levels impact on monetary policy? The naïve argument that
more debt means a bigger increase in debt service costs when interest rates go up and
hence a bigger fall in income available for consumption, tells only half the story.
Debtor households on one side of the aggregate balance sheet correspond to creditor
households on the other. When interest rates rise, the former have less money to
spend on consumption and the latter have correspondingly more money. So in order
for debt levels to have an impact on aggregate demand as interest rates change, the
debtor households must have a higher marginal propensity to spend than the creditor
households. The evidence on this is thin. However, there is some evidence that a
significant proportion of interest payments made by UK debtors does not end up in
the hands of other UK households. So when interest rates rise, aggregate income
available for household consumption will indeed decline. Such cash-flow effects
suggest that higher levels of household debt will make consumption, and hence output
and inflation, more sensitive to interest rate changes. This, of course, indicates that
higher levels of household debt would reduce the extent of the interest rate
adjustments required to hit an inflation target.

9
Three further arguments have been suggested in support of the view that household
debt is a significant factor in the determination of monetary policy. The first concerns
the behaviour of the economy in response to shocks if households have high levels of
debt. This is, presumably, what the Griffiths’ Commission had in mind when it
remarked, a shade dramatically, that “Debt is a time-bomb which could be triggered
by any number of shocks to the economy at any time” (The Griffiths’ Commission,
2005, Executive Summary). Suppose there is a future adverse shock to the UK
economy. This will lead to a rise in UK unemployment and a fall in consumption,
whatever the debt levels. The argument is that higher debt levels will make things
substantially worse. That is because more people will be in a position where they are
unable to extend their borrowing. If they become unemployed, or are threatened with
unemployment, they will significantly reduce consumption because they will be, or
will have the prospect of being, unable to service their debts. The first question is,
will higher debt levels put substantially more people in this position? In aggregate,
there appears to be “plenty of room”. Secured debt is only around one quarter of
gross housing wealth, a substantially lower level than throughout the 1990s. But the
aggregate hides a wide variation across the population and it is the numbers on the
margin which count. Comfort may perhaps be taken from the fact that data from the
Survey of Mortgage Lenders indicate that loan to value ratios on new mortgages are
modest by historical standards and have been trending down for the last decade.
Furthermore, there has been a significant demographic shift towards two-earner
households over the last two decades and these households have a greater cushion
against unemployment.
Another point worth noting is that because one of the key issues in this argument is
the cost of debt service, this will be moderated by easing of monetary policy
following the adverse shock. Back in the early 1990s this option was unavailable
because of the ERM constraint. However, the excessive debt may still induce greater
precautionary saving and a larger drop in consumption. Overall, it is hard to tell
whether higher debt levels will generate a significant additional cut back in
consumption which cannot be modified by easier monetary policy.
The second argument is based on the possibility that households have underestimated
the true real interest rate which they face. So it is sometimes argued that debtors will

10
collectively “wake-up” to the fact that their debts have not been eroded, and will then
take fright and cut their consumption dramatically causing severe macroeconomic
problems. Why households, particularly mortgage holders who have the bulk of the
debt, should do this is not at all clear. It is true that in the era of high inflation, which
ended in 1992, debts were rapidly eroded. But the mortgage holders with the highest
debts relative to income, namely the young, have no adult experience of the high
inflation era. Furthermore, they are the group with the fastest real earnings growth.
So while they might behave in the irrational fashion described above, there seems no
obvious reason why they should.
The third argument is very simple. More people with mortgages means more trouble
if there is a really serious collapse in the housing market. If house prices fall by 30 or
40 per cent, more people with mortgages means more people in negative equity. Of
course, the consequences of this depend to some extent on the behaviour of lenders.
If the mortgage debt continues to be treated as secured, even though some is not, then
debt service costs remain unchanged. So a lot will then depend on the collateral
damage associated with the collapse in the housing market and what caused it in the
first place. For example, the house price correction in the late 1980s and early 1990s
was basically a consequence of the 15 per cent interest rates required to control
inflation. The tight monetary policy also generated a big rise in unemployment and
all this together had a big macroeconomic impact. This particular scenario seems
unlikely today. But what causes the collapse in house prices is not the main question.
The issue is, if some disaster happens in the housing market, does the fact that more
people have mortgages make the consequences very much worse? So much worse,
indeed, that monetary policy should be used to discourage individuals from taking out
mortgages. In my view, this should not be a target of monetary policy.
This leads to the final question, namely, should we ever keep interest rates higher than
would be required to hit the inflation target in the medium term in order not to
encourage further debt accumulation, because this will add to the risk of sharper falls
in consumption generating an even bigger undershoot of the inflation target further
out? In the light of all the previous discussion, my judgment would be no.

11
3. Asset Prices and Monetary Policy
The role of asset prices in the conduct of monetary policy remains a controversial
issue. The consensus view is set out clearly in Bernanke and Gertler (1999), “It is
neither necessary nor desirable for monetary policy to respond to changes in asset
prices, except to the extent that they help to forecast inflationary or deflationary
pressures” (p.115). The alternative view is set out in Cecchetti et al. (2002), “There
are sound theoretical reasons for believing that an inflation targeting central bank
might improve macroeconomic performance by reacting to asset price misalignments
over and above the deviation of, say, a two-year ahead inflation forecast from target.”
(Summary). Roger Bootle (2004) is in no doubt. “Now over-concentration on the
last problem – inflation – has encouraged central banks to pay insufficient attention
to the new problem before their eyes, namely asset price bubbles.” (p.8).
Personally, I favour the consensus view for the following reasons. First, as the
Cecchetti et al. quote makes clear, asset price misalignments, or bubbles, have to be
identified. Since it is often the case that asset prices boom following some
improvement in fundamentals, pin-pointing the extent to which asset prices exceed
the level implied by fundamentals is by no means straightforward. Second, raising
interest rates simply to restrain an asset price boom may reduce one of the shocks
hitting the economy. But this will be at the probable expense of systematically
moving inflation further from target which will add extra instability of its own. As
Chris Allsopp (2002) notes, “It is hard enough to establish a credible (monetary
policy) reaction function based on clear objectives with the interest rate being used to
meet the inflation target …… If the interest rate has another role as well, being used
to moderate the shock structure (eg, by heading off bubbles from time to time), the
reaction function is far less rule-like and predictable, and the system is less likely to
be transparent and accountable” (p.18).
A third reason to favour the consensus view remains valid even were misalignments
or bubbles to be readily identified. The problem is that the relatively long lags in the
monetary transmission mechanism make the appropriate response to asset price
misalignments very hard to calibrate. For example, there is a big risk that rates are
raised and then the asset price bubble bursts just when the deflationary impact of the

12
rate rise hits the economy. As Gruen et al. (2003) demonstrate, even when the nature
of the asset price bubble is common knowledge, there is typically only a very narrow
window during which action is desirable. Finally, it is quite probable that a large
increase in interest rates may be required to have any significant effect on the asset
price bubble, and this may have a big adverse impact on the rest of the economy.
So these are the factors underlying my own views on the subject of asset prices and
monetary policy, but my own experiences have also helped form these views, so it is
to these that I now turn.
Asset Prices and Monetary Policy in Practice
When I joined the MPC in June 2000, the asset price which exercised commentators
and members of the MPC alike was the sterling exchange rate. Thus, during my
confirmation hearings in front of the Treasury Select Committee in May 2000,
Edward Davey MP pointed out to me that “Mervyn King recently told a press
conference that the biggest issue facing the MPC is how to set monetary policy when
confronting an unsustainable exchange rate”, although King was, in fact, referring
solely to the Sterling rate against the Euro. Furthermore, the discussion in Wadhwani
(2000) made it plain that in his view the current level of the sterling exchange rate
represented a significant upward misalignment. As can be seen in Figure 3, between
1996 and 1997, sterling rose by around 25 per cent. Then between 1998 and 2000, it
spent most of the time fluctuating between 98 and 110 (using the index whose value
was 100 in 1990). It was the dramatic rise in 1996/7 which led people to refer to
unsustainability, misalignment and even bubbles. However, as time passed and
sterling remained within the 98/110 band, talk of unsustainability and misalignment
died away, so that at the time of writing (Summer 2005), with sterling still within the
98/110 band, misalignment of the trade-weighted UK exchange rate is rarely thought
to be a major issue for monetary policy. Indeed, some time in early 2002, house
prices took over as the relevant asset price for those who wanted monetary policy to
react to misalignments.
Interestingly, those who wish monetary policy to respond specifically to asset price
misalignments would have had to switch from a policy of lower interest rates in
response to sterling overvaluation to a policy of higher interest rates in response to

13
house price overvaluation. Before discussing the relationship between house prices
and monetary policy in recent years, it is helpful to look at the history of house price
inflation since the late 1990s and the views of some of the interested parties at the
time.
UK House Prices from the Late 1990s
From January 1999 to July 2004, house prices5 in the UK rose by 123% (see Fig.4).
But it was only when the ratio of house prices to average earnings started moving
rapidly above its long-run average level of around 4 in 2001 (see Fig.5) that
commentators started noticing and in April 2002, when the ratio was getting close to
5, John Wriglesworth of Hometrack6 warned: “The danger is only starting and the
seeds have been sown for housing market doom”. In May 2002, Sushil Wadhwani, in
his last month on the MPC, noted: “I believe that a clear signal from monetary
policymakers that they would, other things being equal, react to a bubble if one
clearly emerged would make the continuance of strong house price growth less likely
now” (Wadhwani, 2002, p.21).
By November 1992, Andrew Oswald in a piece dramatically entitled “The Great
2003-2005 Crash in Britain’s Housing Market”, revealed that from the summer of
2003, he expected house prices to fall by 30 per cent and his advice to house owners
was stark, namely “Sell now” (Oswald, 2002, p.2 ).
Andrew Farlow indicated there was a housing bubble and asked “How will the
bursting of the current UK house price bubble look?”. The answer is “At some point
it will either deflate gently or burst dramatically. And evidence overwhelmingly
supports the latter” (Farlow, 2002, p.3).
One year later, in November 2003, house prices were 16 per cent up on a year before
and some commentators were taking a rather different line. “There is more chance of
finding Elvis on the moon than there is of a house-price crash next year”, (John
Wriglesworth, November 2003). By April 2004, house prices were up a further 9 per
cent and warnings of doom were everywhere. For example, Tony Dye remarked “It
will all end in tears. I have thought this for some time, but I think we really are
probably somewhere near the end of it” (April 2004). He was backed up by Gavin

14
Cameron – “No overvaluation of this kind has been corrected without a crash” (April
2004), Andrew Oswald – “Herd instinct and confidence is holding up the market but
in the long run, that won’t work” (April 2004) and Martin Wolf – “Nobody knows
when the bust will come. But come, I believe, it will” (Financial Times, 16 April
2004). However, others were sceptical about a crash. Stephen Bell (Deutsche Bank)
“Would happily wager £100 for charity that Tony Dye’s forecast is wrong” (April
2004).
In July 2004 house prices more or less stopped rising and by November 2004, Phil
Spencer felt able to remark that “Public sentiment has finally accepted there will not
be a crash”. At the time of writing (September 2005) there has been no sign of a
crash with house prices up a little since the previous July.
So what does this pundit based history of house prices reveal from the perspective of
a monetary policy maker? First, as Mervyn King remarked in June 2004, “You’d have
to be either mad or a publicity seeker to predict what is going to happen to house
prices”. But the key feature of this history is the fact that commentators (either
implicitly or explicitly) disagreed significantly on the long-run equilibrium level of
house prices, on where house prices were heading and on the extent to which there
was a misalignment or bubble. So how does this relate to monetary policy?
UK Monetary Policy and the Housing Market since the late 1990s
House prices are relevant for the operation of monetary policy irrespective of whether
or not it responds to asset price misalignments because of the positive empirical
relationship in the UK between house price inflation and household consumption
growth7 and hence future inflation. Thus, in the words of Bernanke and Gertler
(1999), current house price inflation “Helps to forecast inflationary or deflationary
pressures”.
As we have already seen, it appears to be particularly difficult to pin down the
equilibrium level of house prices. Many start from Fig.5 and some simply argue that
it is clear that the ratio of house prices to average earnings is stationary and that the
equilibrium value of this ratio is at, or close to, its long-run average. So, by mid-

15
2004, house prices were a little over six times average earnings and this ratio would
have had to fall by around 35% to reach its average level since 1982.
The first obvious point is that the level of individual earnings is not the natural
denominator. Rather, average household disposable income seems more reasonable.
This is relevant because the proportion of two-earner households has been rising
steadily over the last twenty five years. So if we restrict ourselves to the top 70% of
income earners, because the majority of the rest are on state benefits and are unlikely
to be in the market for houses, we see from Figure 6 that the ratio of house prices to
the average household income of the top 70% of households was around 3.7 in mid2004 and would have had to fall by about 32 % to reach its average level since 1982,
a fall which is some 3 percentage points lower than if we use earnings in the
denominator. This fall is still substantial, however, so why might the equilibrium
ratio have risen in recent years?
There are three factors which may be of some significance. First, the rate at which
new dwellings are being built is at an historically low level whereas, for a variety of
reasons, the growth in the population of working age and the net rate of formation of
new households is relatively high (high divorce rates, high immigration rates etc)8.
Second, the disappearance of the front end loading problem when inflation rates and
nominal interest rates are low. For example, it might be quite sensible for young
professionals to borrow, and for banks to lend them, four or even five times annual
earnings to purchase a house given both their very high level of job security and their
very rapid rate of prospective earnings growth. But in times of high inflation and high
nominal interest rates, this is not possible. For example, suppose real interest rates are
3%. Then if inflation is 12% and nominal interest rates are 15%, a person borrowing
four times their annual pre-tax salary will be paying over 60% of this pre-tax salary in
mortgage payments in the first year – this simply cannot be done. Of course, in later
years this proportion will fall rapidly. Nevertheless, the early years will provide a
binding constraint on the multiple of earnings households can borrow.9 In a low
inflation environment, this binding constraint disappears. If inflation is 2% and
nominal interest rates are 5%, an individual borrowing four times their annual salary
will only be paying 20% of it in mortgage payments in the first year. Perfectly
possible. So the elimination of this constraint as we have gradually moved from a

16
high inflation, high interest rate era to a low inflation, low interest rate period will
have raised the demand for housing in equilibrium, even when real interest rates
remain unchanged.
The third factor underlying the potential rise in the equilibrium house price to
earnings ratio is the apparently substantial and sustained fall in long-run risk free real
interest rates. In Figure 7, we see the time paths of both the 10 year real rate and the
10 year forward, 10 year real rate, both derived from prices in the index-linked gilt
market. Both these rates have fallen from close to four per cent in the mid-1990s to
around two per cent since 1999. And the fact that the 10 year forward, 10 year real
rate has fallen in exactly the same way as the spot rate suggests that markets expect
the fall to have some degree of permanence. It is, however, possible that the
measured fall in the risk free real rate derived from the index-linked gilt market may
be overstated because of the Minimum Funding Requirement announced in the 1997
Pensions Act. This introduced an element of demand for index-linked gilts which was
almost independent of the real yield. However, a long-term risk free real rate close to
2% is not particularly unusual in the UK given that the average long-term real rate in
the period 1951-97 was 2.21% according to Chadha and Dimsdale (1999, Table 3).
Furthermore, Larsen et al. (2003) indicates that 10 year risk free real rates computed
from a consumption based CAPM model with habit persistence also fell significantly
from 1997 on. Finally, long-run risk free real rates have fallen significantly across the
world in the last decade.
Long-term real rates are, of course, crucial in the housing market since they reflect the
average rate which should be used to discount the returns on a long-lived asset and the
real cost of long-term borrowing. One way of measuring the consequences of a fall in
real interest rates on equilibrium house prices is to make use of the equilibrium
relationship between rents in the housing market and house prices. (See Weeken,
2004 and Goldman Sachs, 2004 for examples.) If real net rentals (i.e. after
subtracting maintenance and management costs) today are D and they are expected to
grow at a rate of g, then in equilibrium, the real price of houses, Ph , will equal the
discounted present value of real rents, that is Ph = D / (r f + ρ − g ) where r f is the

risk free real interest rate and ρ is the risk premium10. This means that for plausible

17
values of ρ and g , real house prices are very sensitive to changes in the risk free real
rate. For example, suppose rents grow at the same rate as real wages which implies
that g ≅ 2% and the long-run risk premium averages around 3% (see Weeken, 2004).

Then if the risk free real rate falls from 4% to 2% the equilibrium ratio of real house
prices to real rents will rise by nearly 67 per cent. Given our assumption that real
rents tend to grow at the same rate as real wages, an assumption broadly consistent
with the facts, the equilibrium ratio of house prices to earnings may be expected to
rise by a similar amount solely because of the observed fall in the long-term real
interest rate. And since the actual ratio of house prices to earnings has risen by
around 70% since the mid-1990s to the present day, it may be argued that it is close to
equilibrium. Of course this is a very rough and ready calculation. The remains of
MIRAS (tax relief on mortgage interest payments) were still in operation in the mid1990s, although its impact was small by that stage. Transactions costs in the housing
market are substantial and the rental market is subject to many tax and regulatory
distortions. Furthermore, as we have seen, estimates of equilibrium house prices are
sensitive to the value of the long-run real interest rate. For example, in Goldman
Sachs (2004), it is assumed that the real long rate will rise to 2.75%. This is a key
factor underlying their prediction of a 20% fall in house prices by 2008.
Overall, this discussion leads us to conclude that there has probably been a substantial
rise in the equilibrium house price to earnings ratio since the mid-1990s11. Of course,
there is a good deal of uncertainty here, but it is clear that it may be legitimately
argued that there has been no housing bubble whatever (see CESifo, 2005, Ch.5
where this argument is extended to other European countries). It also explains why
there is such widespread disagreement among commentators on the issue of where the
housing market is going at any particular time. Finally, it is clear that anyone who
takes the view that monetary policy should respond specifically to misalignments or
bubbles in asset prices would have had a very hard job in recent years with regard to
house prices because the existence of a bubble was never clear.
How Much Would Interest Rates Have Had to Rise to Impact on the Housing Market?
One of the most interesting features of the argument about how to respond to asset
price misalignments, particularly with regard to the recent house price boom, is that

18
supporters of bubble pricking rarely tell us about the rate rises they would
recommend. Suppose, for example, that it was clear by late 2002 that there was a
housing bubble and that, in the words of Andrew Farlow, “We would be better served
by …… monetary policy that takes the possibility of housing bubbles seriously”
(Farlow, 2002, p.4). Then what sort of interest rate rises are required? Pretty big is
the view of Willem Buiter, “50 basis points, or even 150 basis points in a housing
boom is tackling an elephant with a peashooter”, House of Lords, 2004, p.127, Q411.
Using the Bank of England model and house price equation, we try and answer this
question. Of course, any answers we obtain have to be treated with caution since they
are bound to be subject to substantial error. However, they should give us the right
order of magnitude. Taking house price inflation in Fig.8, what sort of rise in interest
rates in 2002 would have been required to eliminate the surge in house price inflation
in 2003-4 and generate instead the dotted path (Fig.8a)? It is hard to do this exactly,
but to produce a close path which ends up at the same level as the dotted path (the xxx
path in Fig.8b), we need a 300 basis points rise in the interest rate in 2002 Q3 which
lasts for 13 quarters. Not surprisingly this interest rate shift has a significant impact
on the overall economy, taking more than 1/2 per cent off GDP in 2003 and 1 per cent
off inflation in 2004. Thus, to “prick the housing bubble” involves a substantial cut in
GDP and a dramatic undershoot of the inflation target12. Unfortunately, the Bank of
England model cannot be used to compute the long-term benefits of pricking the
housing bubble because this would depend crucially on whether or not there is going
to be a housing crash on account of the bubble not being pricked. As yet, no such
crash has been observed. As it stands, at the moment it is impossible to say whether
pricking the bubble at this cost would have been worth it. Currently, it looks unlikely.
4. The Switch in the Inflation Target

In December 2003, the Chancellor announced that the inflation target which the Bank
of England Monetary Policy Committee would have to hit was going to change from
2.5% on the RPIX measure to 2.0% on the CPI measure (previously known as the
HICP measure). This new target was to take effect from December 2003. This
announcement was not a surprise since the Chancellor had previously announced in
the Spring of 2003 that he was going to switch the inflation target to a new level

19
based on the HICP measure at some point. At that stage he did not specify the
numerical value of the proposed new target.
The main differences between the old inflation measure (RPIX) and the new one
(HICP or CPI) were well known at the time of the initial announcement in the Spring
of 2003 and were as follows:
i)

In the HICP (CPI), the geometric mean is used to aggregate price changes
at the most basic level whereas the RPIX used the arithmetic mean.

Since the geometric mean of a group of different positive numbers is always less
than the arithmetic mean of the same group of numbers13, this difference in the
construction of the two measures will always tend to make HICP (CPI) inflation
lower than RPIX inflation. This is the formula effect and, on average, makes
HICP (CPI) inflation 0.5 percentage points per annum lower than RPIX inflation.
ii)

HICP (CPI) excludes housing depreciation, council tax and dwellings
insurance. RPIX includes these.

The housing depreciation element and council taxes have tended to rise faster than
the other elements of RPIX, on average. Their exclusion will therefore tend, in
the long run, to lower measured inflation assuming that house prices track
earnings over the long term and council tax rates continue to rise faster than 2.5%
pa. The long-run impact of this housing effect is likely to make HICP (CPI)
inflation around 0.3 percentage points per annum lower than RPIX inflation14.
iii)

HICP (CPI) includes university accommodation fees, foreign students’
tuition fees, stockbrokers’ charges. RPIX excludes these. Also there are
numerous other minor differences.

On average over the period up to the time of the switch, these differences between
HICP and RPIX contributed nothing to the long-run average inflation rate
differentials between the two measures.
The differences under points (i) and (ii), when combined, suggest a long-run
average differential between HICP and RPIX inflation of 0.8 percentage points

20
per annum. In the shorter term, there is a great deal of variation in the differential
as we can see from Fig.9. While the formula effect is relatively stable, the
housing and other elements of the differential are highly volatile. Back in 2003
the differential was very large because the housing depreciation element, which
depends on recent rates of house price inflation, was making such a large
contribution to RPIX inflation15. But even the long-run average differential of 0.8
is large. So the switch to the HICP (CPI) measure of inflation meant that
measured inflation was considerably lower, on average, than it would have been
had we stuck to RPIX.
So what were the implications of this switch for monetary policy?
Monetary Policy after the Switch
The old price index, RPIX, and the new price index, CPI, are both cost of living
indices. According to the latter, the cost of living is rising at an average of 0.8
percentage points per annum more slowly than under the RPIX measure.
Whichever is used, however, makes no difference whatever to the rate of increase
of the true cost of living, of which RPIX and CPI are simply different measures.
This implies that the real interest rate under RPIX is, on average, 0.8 percentage
points lower than the real interest rate under CPI, ceteris paribus. The true real
interest rate is, of course, unaffected by the measure which is used. The same
applies to real wage growth which is, on average, 0.8 percentage points lower
under RPIX than under CPI, ceteris paribus. Again, the true level of real wage
growth is unaffected.
Following on from these arguments, in Nickell (2003b), prior to the switch in
targets, I set out the implications of the prospective switch for monetary policy. It
is interesting to see to what extent these implications stand up now that the switch
has taken place. The four implications in Nickell (2003b) were as follows.
Implication 1. The long-run stance of monetary policy will be unaffected by the

switch to an HICP target.
This was simply based on the argument that the switch would have no long-run
real impact on the economy, including on the true real interest rate. In Fig.10, we

21
see that there is no noticeable shift in UK real interest rates in or around
December 2003.
Implication 2. If the HICP target is set at 2.0%, this is equivalent, in the long

run, to a switch from an RPIX target of 2.5% to an RPIX target of 2.8%. Since the
long-run real interest rate is unaffected by the switch (see Implication 1), the
long-run nominal interest rate will be 0.3 percentage points higher after the
switch
As it happened, the CPI (HICP) target turned out to be 2%, so given that the
average gap between this and RPIX inflation is 0.8, this represents a genuine
switch of target. This implication is borne out by the fact that the market based
RPI inflation expectations series shifts from around 2.5% to close to 2.8% at the
beginning of 2004, (see Fig.11). The last part of the implication concerning the
long-term nominal interest rate cannot be checked because these interest rates tend
to be quite volatile and the counter-factual is completely unobserved.
Implication 3. If the HICP target is set at 2%, this implies that the short-term

monetary policy stance has to be such as to raise the longer-term inflation rate by
0.3 percentage points. This involves slightly looser monetary policy for a limited
period than would otherwise be the case. However, given the large variations in
the gap between HICP and RPI inflation and the frequent shocks to which the
economy is subject, this temporary loosening would be barely noticeable in
practice.
Given the 0.8 percentage point long-term gap, a 2.5% RPIX target is equivalent to
a 1.7% HICP (CPI) target. Hence the 0.3 percentage point rise in inflation
required to hit a 2.0% HICP target. Since the beginning of 2004, CPI inflation has
indeed risen so that it is now close to the 2.0% target. However, this has, in the
main, followed from the steady rise in the price of oil over the same period.
Implication 4. A switch to an HICP target of 2% today should have little or no

impact on the current stance of monetary policy despite the large gap between
RPIX and HICP inflation. This is because this large gap is only temporary,
generated by the recent surge in house price inflation which impacts on RPIX via
the housing depreciation element but not on HICP. As this surge fades away, the
gap will close to more normal levels and given the structure of the August RPI

22
projection, the corresponding HICP projection would not be very different from
2% towards the end of the forecast horizon.
When this was written (September 2003), the gap between HICP and RPIX was
very large. Since that time it has indeed narrowed significantly following the
slowdown in house price inflation and other factors (see Fig.9) and CPI (HICP)
inflation is indeed close to the 2% target. Over the period of the switch, interest
rates were rising but, as the MPC Minutes of the era make plain, the target switch
had no significant impact on policy. In the light of all this, was the target switch a
good thing?
Was the Switch from an RPIX Target to a CPI Target a Good Thing?
The main differences between the RPIX and CPI indices are the first two set out
earlier (p.23). The use of the geometric mean in the aggregation of price changes
is definitely superior to the use of the arithmetic mean because only the former
takes some account of the fact that consumers will tend to substitute away from
goods whose prices rise the fastest towards goods whose prices rise the slowest.
In this sense the switch represents an improvement. The omission of housing
costs is a more contentious issue. The housing depreciation element in RPI has a
weight of around 4.4% and is based on a distributed lag of the ODPM measure of
house prices. As we have already noted in Footnote 14, this is not a good measure
of housing depreciation and was only introduced into the Retail Price Index in
1995. However, it has had a significant impact on RPIX in recent years. Thus the
burst of house price inflation from 2002 generated a significant surge in RPIX
inflation to levels well above target for much of 2003. No such surge can be
observed in CPI inflation.
In my view, incorporating house prices directly in a consumer price index is not a
good idea. There may be a good argument for including the user cost of housing
and, ignoring capital gains, the real user cost is Ph (r f + ρ + δ ) , where Ph is the

real price of houses, r f is the long-term risk free real interest rate, ρ is the risk
premium and δ is the rate of depreciation. While this is proportional to house
prices, if real house prices over the long haul are being driven by changes in the
long-term real interest rate, then fluctuations in house prices will not adequately

23
reflect fluctuations in user cost. Better, in my view, to use market rents as a proxy
for the user cost of owner-occupied housing.
Turning to the monetary policy implications of the housing depreciation element
in RPIX, as it happens, the house price generated surge in RPIX inflation in 2003
had little impact on UK monetary policy essentially because the MPC failed to
forecast the inflation surge at an early enough date16. Of course, the house price
explosion had a strong effect on monetary policy because of its impact on
consumption and aggregate demand. But this would have been the case even if
CPI had been targeted.
On balance, therefore, I view the switch from an RPIX target to a CPI target as a
positive move. It has had little impact on monetary policy and CPI is a superior
price index. The only drawback with the CPI index is that it does not capture
owner occupied housing costs at all. This awaits an agreement at the European
level. However, it is arguable that omitting this element of the cost of living
altogether is better than actually incorporating house prices as a flawed measure of
housing depreciation or owner-occupied housing costs.
5. Summary and Conclusions

I have considered three topics. First, the rise in household debt and its implications
for monetary policy. Second, the role of asset prices in monetary policy. Third, the
implications of the switch in the inflation target at the end of 2003.
The conclusions are as follows. The driving force behind the dramatic rise in
household debt over the last thirty years is the continuing rise in owner-occupied
dwellings and in the proportion of households with a mortgage. More recently, the
rapid rise in house prices has also been important. Interestingly enough, the overall
rise in household debt over the last eight years has not had a big impact on
consumption growth because, over the same period, there has also been a significant
increase in the rate of accumulation, by households, of financial assets. Finally, while
it is possible that higher levels of debt may make household consumption more

24
sensitive to interest rate changes, this may easily be offset simply by moderating these
same changes.
Concerning the role of asset prices in monetary policy, here we have analysed the
implications of the 2002-4 UK housing boom. The overall conclusions are first, it is
impossible to tell whether or not there has been a house price bubble in the light of the
fall in UK long-term real interest rates from around 4% in the mid 1990s to around
2% by 2000. Second, to have any significant impact on the housing boom, the MPC
would have had to raise interest rates by around 300 basis points for three years from
late 2002. This would have cut GDP growth by more than 1/2% in 2003 and sent
inflation far below target in 2004. Third, it is impossible to say, at the moment,
whether or not such a policy would have been worth doing in order to reduce the size
of the subsequent housing market crash. Since no crash has yet been observed,
currently it seems unlikely that the “bubble pricking” policy would have been
sensible, ex post. And, who knows, if the MPC had raised interest rates by 300 basis
points in 2002, sterling might truly have risen to unsustainable levels!
Finally, the switch from a 2.5% inflation target on the RPIX measure to a 2.0%
inflation target on the CPI (HICP) measure, at the end of 2003, turned out to have
minimal implications for monetary policy. Furthermore, the CPI is a marginally
superior cost of living index relative to the RPIX.

25
Footnotes

1. As it happens, average quarterly consumption growth from 2004, Q1 to the
present (ie. 2005 Q1) is also 0.77%.
2. The period 1996-97 was the era of building society demutualisations when
households received substantial windfall gains. These may have had an
impact on consumption growth in the late 1990s.
3. These are money flows. This equation takes no account of the changes in
value of the existing stock of assets which are very important in determining
changes in the balance sheet position of households.
4. For those readers who are more persuaded by the paraphernalia of Granger
Causality Tests no debt measure or combination of debt measures come close
to Granger causing real consumption once real post-tax labour income is
included in the model.
5. All statistics on house prices refer to an average of the Halifax and Nationwide
house price indices.
6. This, and future quotes not explicitly referenced are to be found at
www.housepricechat.co.uk
7. Recent evidence suggests that the main factor underlying this relationship is
the fact that both house prices and household consumption tend to be
positively related to expectations of future earnings. The collateral effect,
arising from the fact that higher housing equity allows for increased secured
borrowing at real interest rates which are markedly lower than unsecured rates
appears to play a minor role. See Attanasio et al. (2005).
8. The Barker Interim Report (2003) has a lot of information on these issues.
9. Of course, the front-end loading problem can be entirely eliminated if the
lender, at the end of each year, raises the nominal mortgage loan to offset at
least some part of the real reduction in the loan which has come about via
inflation. Presumably because of the high transactions costs involved, such
behaviour was not common during the high inflation period.
10. The present value of real rents is
∞

∫ De

gt

e

(

)

− rf + ρ t

dt = D / (r f + ρ − g ) , so long as r f + ρ − g > 0 .

°

11. This conclusion is completely at variance with that set out in Farlow (2004).
The main reason is that Farlow only considers short-run real interest rates
which have fallen little since the mid-1990s. However, when purchasing a
very long-lived asset, the long-run real interest rate is substantially more
relevant and this has fallen since the mid-1990s.

26
12. At first sight, this level of response to a 300 basis point rise in interest rates
may seem rather modest. To generate these numbers, I suppose that the
temporary nature of the rise in interest rates is known to the general public and
further, that inflation expectations remain anchored at the 2% target. If, as
might well have been the case in practice, such a move in interest rates
detached inflation expectations from the target, the fall in economic activity
and inflation would have been significantly larger.
13. If there are two numbers, a1 , a2 the arithmetic means (AM) is 1 (a1 + a2 ) and
2
the geometric mean (GM) is (a1a2 ) 2 . If there are n numbers, a1 , a2 , … , an ,
1
1
the AM is (a1 + a2 + ...an ) and the GM is (a1a2 a3 ...an ) n . So long as the
n
numbers are all positive and not all the same, a famous theorem states that the
GM is less than the AM. For example if a1 = 1, a2 = 4 the AM is 1 2 (1 + 4) = 2
1

1

½ and the GM is (1x4) 2 = 2 .
14. This is based on a long-run rate of house price inflation of 4.5% (in line with
trend average earnings growth) and council tax rises of 6.5% a year (the
average gap between council tax rises and RPIX inflation over the period
1997-2003 is around 4 percentage points).
15. The housing depreciation element of RPI is supposed to capture the
contribution to the cost of living of the cost associated with maintaining homes
in response to their natural tendency to depreciate over time – eg. replacing the
roof when necessary. This element was only introduced into the RPI in 1995
as a consequence of a majority recommendation of the RPI Advisory
Committee (see CSO, 1994). This majority recommendation suggested that
the costs associated with putting right the depredations of ageing in homes was
best measured by a distributed lag on house prices. As the closely argued
minority view expressed by Michael Fleming, Rita Maurice and Ralph Turvey
noted, there was a serious problem here, namely that a substantial proportion
of the rise in the price of housing reflects a rise in the price of land. Since land
does not depreciate, the price of housing does not accurately reflect housing
depreciation costs, indeed it typically overstates them (although not always; it
probably understates them when house prices are falling). Arguably, some
index of building costs would probably have been a better indicator of housing
depreciation costs.
16. A careful study of the Bank of England forecasts reveals that the surge in
RPIX inflation above target during 2003 was first predicted in November
2002. Since changes in the interest rate at that point would have had little
impact on inflation until 2004, this surge had no significant effect on monetary
policy.

27
Allsopp, C. (2002), “Macroeconomic Policy Rules in Theory and
Practice”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Winter, 485-504.
Attanasio, O., Blow, L., Hamilton, R. and Leicester, A. (2005), “Booms
and Busts: Consumption, House Prices and Expectations”,
Bank of England Working Paper 271.
Barker, K. (2003), Review of housing supply, interim report – analysis,
(Norwich, HMSO).
Benito, A. and Power, J. (2004), “Housing Equity and Consumption:
Insights from the Survey of English Housing”, Bank of England
Quarterly Bulletin, Autumn, 302-09.
Bernanke, B. S. and Gertler, M. (1999), “Monetary Policy and Asset
Volatility”, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium,
Jackson Hole, August.
Bootle, R. (2004), “Monetary Policy Up for Review?”, Deloitte
Economic Review, Third Quarter.
Cecchetti, S., Genberg, H. and Wadhwani, S. (2002), “Asset Prices in a
Flexible Inflation Targeting Framework” in Asset Price Bubbles:
The Implications for Monetary, Regulatory and International
Policies (eds. W. C. Hunter, G. G. Kaufman and M. Pomerleano),
(Cambridge: MIT
Press), 427-44.
CESifo (2005), Report on the European Economy 2005, (Munich: Ifo
Institute for Economic Research).
Chadha, J. S. and Dimsdale, N. H. (1999), “A long view of real rates”,
Oxford Review of Economic Policy, Vol.15(2), pages 17-45.
CSO (1994), “Treatment of Owner Occupiers’ Housing Costs in the
Retail Prices Index”, Retail Prices Index Advisory Committee,
December, CM2717 (London: HMSO).
Farlow, A. (2002), “The UK House Price Bubble”, Oriel College, Oxford
November.
Farlow, A. (2004), “UK House Prices: A Critical Assessment”, Credit
Suisse First Boston (prepared for Credit Suisse First Boston,
Housing Market Conference, 12 May 2003).
Goldman Sachs (2004), “Adjusting to lower house prices”,
UK Economics Analyst, June.
Gruen, D., Plumb, M. and Stone, A. (2003), “How Should Monetary
Policy Respond to Asset Price Bubbles?” in A. Richard and T.
Robinson (eds.), Asset Prices and Monetary Policy (Sydney:

28
Reserve Bank of Australia), 260-80.
Larsen, J., May, B. and Talbot, J. (2003), “Estimating real interest rates
for the United Kingdom”, Bank of England Working Paper no.200.
May, O., Tudala, M. and Young, G. (2004), “British Household
Indebtedness and Financial Stress: A Household-Level Picture”,
Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Winter, 414-28.
Nickell, S. (2003a), “House Prices, Household Debt and Monetary
Policy”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Spring, 131-36.
Nickell, S. (2003b). “Two Current Monetary Policy issues”, Bank of
England Quarterly Bulletin, Winter, 504-17.
Oswald, A. (2002), “The Great 2003-2005 Crash in Britain’s Housing
Market”, November (www.oswald.co.uk).
The Griffiths’ Commission (2005), What Price Credit?, The Griffiths’
Commission on Personal Debt, Centre for Social Justice, London
(http://www.centreforsocialjustice.org.uk/page/content/pdf/pubgriff
ithscomm.pdf)
Wadhwani, S. (2000), “The Exchange Rate and the MPC: What Can We
Do?”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, August, 297-306.
Wadhwani, S. (2002), “The MPC: Some Further Challenges”,
Speech delivered at the National Institute of Social and Economic
Research, May 16.
Weeken, O. (2004), “Asset pricing and the housing market”, Bank of
England Quarterly Bulletin, Spring, pages 32-41.

29

Figure 1
Quarterly Consumption Growth 1996-2003
Average 1996-1999

Figure 2
Consumption and Debt 1998-2003

Per cent

Average 2000-2003

2

0.12

0.96

1.5

0.10

0.95

0.08

0.94

0.06

0.93

0.04

0.92

0.5
0
-0.5
1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

1990=100
120
115
110
105
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

Source: Bank of England.
Note: The Bank of England now publishes a new sterling ERI measure, which
is based on updated trade weights. This chart shows the old measure, but it is
not very different from the new measure.

0.97

Consumption (right-hand scale)

MEW plus unsecured credit growth (left-hand scale)

0.91
0.90

1999

2000

2001

Sources: Bank of England and ONS.

Figure 3
The Sterling ERI (1990 = 100)

1992

0.02
0.00
1998

Source: ONS.

1990

Proportion of post-tax income

0.14

1

1996

Proportion of post-tax income

2.5

2002

2003

30

Figure 4
UK House Prices (Average of Halifax and Nationwide Indices)
Figure 4a
Figure 4b
The Level of House Prices
House Price Inflation
1990=100

Last 3 months on previous 3 months (per cent)

300

8

250

6

200

4

150

2

100

0

50

-2

0
1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

-4

2005

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

Sources: Halifax and Nationwide.

Sources: Halifax and Nationwide.

Figure 5
UK House Prices Relative to Average Annual
Earnings

Figure 6
Ratio of House Prices to Average Household
Disposable Income (top 70% of households)
Ratio

Ratio
7

7

6

6

5

5

4

4

Average since 1982

3

3

Average since 1982

2

2

1

1
0

0
1982

1985

1988

1991

1994

Sources: Halifax, Nationwide and ONS.

1997

2000

2003

1982

1985

1988

1991

1994

1997

2000

2003

Sources: General Household Survey, Halifax, Nationwide, and ONS.

31

Figure 7
10-Year Real Interest Rates
Per cent
6
5

Ten-year forward ten years out

4
3
Ten-year spot

2
1
0

1985

1988

1991

1994

1997

2000

2003

Source: Bank of England.
Note: Real interest rates implied by index-linked gilts.

Figure 8
Pricking the House Price Bubble
Figure 8a
Figure 8b
Alternative Path of House Price Inflation
Alternative Path of House Prices
Percentage change on a quarter earlier
Rate Hike
2002Q3

Index
Rate Hike
2002Q3
Desired
path

8.0
7.0
6.0

Alternative
path

4.0
3.0
Desired
path

1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
Sources: Halifax, Nationwide and Bank of England.

2.0

2.5
2.3
2.1

5.0
Average of Halifax
and Nationwide Indices

2.7

Average of Halifax
and Nationwide Indices

1.9
1.7
1.5
1.3

1.0

1.1

0.0

0.9
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005

Sources: Halifax, Nationwide and Bank of England.

32

Figure 9a
RPIX and CPI Inflation

Figure 9
Aspects of the RPIX and CPI Inflation Measures
Figure 9b
Contributions to the Differential Between Annual
RPIX Inflation and HICP Inflation
Percentage Change yoy

percentage
points

3.5

1.8

3

Total

RPIX
2.5
2

Exclusion of housing
components

1.2

0.6

1.5
1

CPI

0.0

0.5

Formula effect

Other
-0.6

0
1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005

Source: ONS.

Sources: ONS and Bank of England.

Figure 10
10-year UK Forward Real Interest Rates

Figure 11
Market Based 10-Year Ahead Inflation
Expectations
Per cent

Per cent

Change in inflation target

4
3.5

3.5

3

3.0

2.5

2.5

2

2.0

1.5
1

1.5
RPIX inflation
target

1.0

0.5

0.5

0
1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

4.0

2005

Source: Bank of England
Note: These rates are based on the yields on index-linked gilts and are based
throughout on the RPI.

0.0
1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

Source: Bank of England
Note: This chart shows the ten-year ahead annual inflation forward rate,
defined as the difference between the ten-year ahead annual nominal rate and
the ten-year ahead annual real rate. The real rates are based on the yields on
index-linked gilts and are based throughout on the RPI.

33

Table 1
Accumulation of Household Debt and Assets

1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005 Q1
Source: ONS

NA of financial NA of housing NA of financial liabilities / PT
assets / PT
assets / PT
income (%)
income (%)
income (%)
Total
Unsecured Secured
8.9
4.9
3.8
0.6
3.2
10.2
5.3
5.3
1.2
4.1
11.9
5.4
5.7
1.6
4.1
11.2
5.6
5.9
2.1
3.8
12.2
5.7
7.0
2.1
4.9
7.3
5.8
7.9
2.4
5.5
9.3
6.1
10.4
2.4
8.1
8.5
5.9
9.9
2.2
7.8
11.6
6.2
11.6
2.5
9.1
14.9
6.8
16.6
2.9
13.7
15.7
7.2
17.4
2.6
14.8
15.2
7.8
17.1
2.9
14.2
14.6
7.9
15.7
2.9
12.8

