“Property and the Economy”
Speech given by
David Clementi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England

At the Chartered Surveyors’ Livery Company International Dinner, Goldsmith’s Hall,
London
29 April 2002

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Introduction
Property markets, both residential and commercial, are of perennial interest for the Bank of
England. Why? Because they are, at the same time, barometers of economic conditions and
potentially also the source of financial risks; and even, in extreme cases, financial crises.
I will start by saying a little more about the reasons for the Bank’s interest in property, go on
to discuss some medium-term developments in property markets and end with a few
comments on current property issues and their implications for the broader economic policy
debate.
Why the Bank takes an interest in the property market
The first and most familiar of the Bank’s three Core Purposes is to maintain the integrity and
value of the currency. In practice, this translates into achieving an inflation target of 2½% per
year on the RPIX measure. This target is set annually by the Chancellor, and it was
reaffirmed in the Budget speech earlier this month. It is the task of the Monetary Policy
Committee, which meets each month, to decide on the level of interest rates needed to deliver
this result.
Our other two Core Purposes are perhaps less well known, but complement that of monetary
stability. They are: to maintain financial stability of the system as a whole, both domestically
and, so far as we can contribute, internationally; and to ensure the efficiency and
effectiveness of the UK financial system in supporting the rest of the economy.
Property markets are relevant to all three of our Core Purposes. They are, first of all, very
large markets, so that property lending and investment are important elements in banks’ and
fund managers’ portfolios. Residential mortgage lending, for example, currently totals around
£600 billion. Bank lending directly to commercial property companies amounts to a further
£60-70 billion, while total commercial property lending, direct and indirect, may total more
than £200 billion. With numbers like that, the potential for upsets in the property market to
cause problems for the banking sector are clear. We have seen this in the past, when poor
lending decisions and high levels of property-related debt have led to strains on UK banks and

2

even threatened the financial system as a whole, most notably in the fringe banking crisis of
the mid-1970s. Aside from the risks for the financial system, movements in property values
can have important macroeconomic effects, exemplified by the well-established links between
house prices and consumer spending.
How the Bank gets its information about property
In carrying out its monitoring and analysis, the Bank draws on a wide variety of information
sources. On the residential side, these include the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors,
the Council of Mortgage Lenders, and some major individual lenders such as the Halifax and
Nationwide, both of which of course publish well-known house price indices. On the
commercial side, information is less readily available, and less easily assembled into an
overall picture. It was partly for this reason that, following the property-related problems of
the early 1990s, the Bank established its Property Forum. The Forum brings together
representatives of investors, lenders, occupiers, and researchers, as well as officials from the
Bank, HMT, the FSA and DTLR. The Forum meets quarterly, and is currently under the
chairmanship of Clive Lewis, a past president of the RICS. Its work is supported by a regular
round of liaison meetings with lenders and other participants in the property market. This
helps us to monitor current developments and to identify underlying structural issues.
I would like to highlight four of these issues, which may, at least over time, affect the way
that we think about the property market.
More limited role of public equity finance
The first is the reduced reliance of property companies on public equity finance, where the
facts I think are clear. The number of quoted property companies has fallen by 40% over the
past decade. Public-to-private deals in the commercial property sector accounted for a fall of
£4 billion in the value of quoted equity in 2000 alone, according to DTZ research. And the
proportion of pension fund and life assurance assets allocated to property has fallen from
around 15% twenty five years ago to a little over 5% now.
The attractiveness of publicly quoted equity for property companies has always been limited
by the fact that it tends to trade at something of a discount to other issues, reflecting the rather
3

special characteristics of the underlying market – relatively low liquidity, relatively high
transaction costs and the ‘lumpiness’ of most property transactions. But the trend away from
public listing probably also reflects a greater perceived attractiveness of debt finance. The
large positive yield gap between property returns and borrowing costs reflects both the
decline in official interest rates, and the reduction in lending margins as competition for
business has risen, fed in part by an increased involvement of banks from overseas. Bank
lending to the property sector has grown rapidly in recent years, and I want to return to the
implications of this for both monetary and financial stability shortly.
Financial innovation in commercial property
The second structural trend I want to highlight is the heightened pace of financial innovation
in the commercial property market. Much of the motivation for this has reflected a desire to
take property off balance sheet, and in this firms certainly seem to have been successful.
Direct holdings of property by private non-financial companies fell from just under half of
their fixed assets in 1995 to just over a third in 2000.
This has been achieved using a number of techniques, including sale and lease back, equity
investment vehicles (principally limited partnerships) and securitisations (which create a
tradable interest in a pool of property assets). Of these, the take up of securitisations in the
UK remains rather modest when compared to the US, in part reflecting differences in market
structures, fiscal and legal regimes. But the market is well developed compared with that in
the rest of Europe (UK structural finance issues for example accounted for some 35% of the
European total last year). And there appears to be considerable scope for further growth in
the medium term, though a rapid expansion is perhaps unlikely in current market conditions,
in which margins are judged by some observers to be rather thin.
Other forms of financial innovation in the commercial sector, such as property-related
derivatives, have so far proved less popular. There may be an element of ‘chicken and egg’ to
this: an active derivatives market typically depends on, but also contributes to, an active
secondary market in the underlying asset. One aspect of the problem is the reliance of
proposed derivatives on property indices, which given the illiquidity of the secondary
property market must often be based on professional valuations rather than traded prices.
This in turn raises various questions about the reliability and objectivity of the valuations, and
4

about whether they lead or lag such market prices as are available. In this context
development of the Investment Property Databank indices is encouraging; but it is of course
for the industry to decide whether alternative or better indices might be constructed.
Assessing the impact of financial innovation on the degree and incidence of financial risk is a
crucial aspect of the Bank’s financial stability role. New instruments and structures have the
potential to deliver a better match between borrowers’ and lenders’ preferences. But they can
also mean that better quality assets leave banks’ balance sheets, so that the remaining loans
are of lower quality. And the variety and complexity of deals raise issues about whether the
risks are always fully understood by all the parties involved.
Changes in the financing of residential property
My third theme relates to the residential sector, and specifically to changes in the pattern of
mortgage finance. The mortgage market has certainly changed a great deal since I was a first
time buyer. In the 1960s and 1970s, access to finance depended on establishing a relationship
with a particular mortgage provider, leading to the familiar ‘mortgage queue’. Now of course
most of the formal and informal quantitative controls have been relaxed, and the nature of the
market has been dramatically altered by the entry of many new firms.
One implication of these changes is that consumers no longer need to wait till they move
house to renegotiate the terms of their mortgage. The average turnover period for a mortgage
has fallen from seven to four years over the past decade, and re-mortgaging now accounts for
around a third of gross mortgage advances. Households have of course been keen to take
advantage of the various discounts on offer in the market. But the rise in re-mortgaging has
also been a response to the much greater variety of mortgage products on offer. For example,
until a few years ago, all mortgages were floating rate. Such mortgages are attractive, of
course, when interest rates are falling, as they have been recently; but they become less
beguiling when rates have to rise! Fixed rate mortgages, which allow consumers to insure
against this cashflow risk for some period, have become very popular in the UK, and now
account for around a third of new mortgages sold.
The increased liquidity in the market, together with more flexible mortgage products, has also
facilitated more frequent mortgage equity withdrawal, or ‘MEW’ for short. Research by the
5

Council of Mortgage Lenders suggests that around half of those remortgaging took the
opportunity to withdraw equity. In the past, MEW has often been used to fund spending by
households. MEW reached a peak of 8% of personal income at the height of the surge in
consumer spending in the late-80s, but subsequently fell back sharply. In the past few years,
it has risen back to around 4% of personal income, but – according to a recent MORI survey –
at least part of this reflects substitution from other types of borrowing (such as personal loans
and credit cards) rather than financing extra spending. The MPC looks closely at the data on
mortgage equity withdrawal at our monthly meetings, but there is no automatic read-through
from these estimates to demand prospects.
Greater availability of mortgage credit has also fuelled interest in the buy-to-let market, which
has grown fivefold since 1998. The risks to financial stability of this activity are probably
rather small – buy-to-let still only accounts for some 1½% of total UK residential mortgage
balances outstanding. But given recent growth rates, the initiative announced by the Council
of Mortgage Lenders to ensure that potential investors have the right information and advice
before entering this market is timely.
Low inflation
My final medium-term issue relates to the effects of low inflation on the property market. The
attractions of property as a hedge against inflation may seem to have diminished in a lowerinflation environment. But the benefits of property as an investment have never depended on
high inflation alone. Some analysts have argued the case for property as an investment in an
environment of low gilt and equity yields. And the introduction of FRS 17 has induced some
pension funds to consider investing in more stable income streams, which might include
rental income. I would at the same time however be cautious about how much faith one
should put in analysts’ estimates of the prospective earnings yield on property. These
estimates may not fully reflect periods when property is vacant, or fully include the costs of
refurbishing property. The impact of shortening lease lengths is also a key factor in the
assessment of the attractiveness of property for investors. In the medium term at least, the
returns from first class properties with first class covenants can never be that far apart from
the cost of funds over the relevant period. In the past, borrowers in both residential and
commercial property sectors might have been prepared to take on heavy initial debt service
commitments in the knowledge that the real burden would fall over time as inflation eroded
6

the nominal repayments. In periods of low expected inflation borrowers can no longer rely on
this effect.
The current macroeconomic environment
Having set out some of the important longer-term trends, I now want to turn to look at the
implications of developments in the property market for the Bank’s goals of monetary and
financial stability.
Let me take monetary stability first. As I have already said, the Bank seeks to ensure that
inflation remains on target at 2½%, which is the best contribution we can make to the wider
goals of sustainable growth and employment. Since the MPC was established, evidence on
this has been reasonably encouraging, with annual GDP growth only falling below 2% in four
quarters since 1997. Part of that weaker growth has of course occurred recently, as the world
economy slowed sharply. The MPC has sought to keep inflation on track during this period
by cutting interest rates to maintain domestic demand. The property market has played an
important part in this delicate balancing act, but there are substantial differences between the
role played by the residential market on the one hand, and that played by the commercial
sector on the other.
Developments in the residential market
Activity in the residential market has grown rapidly in recent years. House prices have risen
strongly, with demand for housing buoyant and supply constrained by low rates of house
building. Though continuing divergence between the main measures complicates the
assessment, both the Halifax and Nationwide measures suggest that annual house price
inflation is currently running at levels in the mid-teens. That broad picture is corroborated by
the balance measure prepared by the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, which points
to continuing strength in house price inflation over the next few months.
The rise in house prices has been accompanied by strong growth in borrowing. Mortgage
lending has risen by over 8 per cent per annum on average since 1999; and the average
mortgage loan is now some £70,000, substantially above the previous peak in the late 1980s
even after adjusting for inflation. Part of this borrowing consists of mortgage equity

7

withdrawal, which has risen sharply in recent quarters as I noted earlier. But the economic
implications of increased borrowing depend, not just on the absolute size of the rise in
borrowing, but on households’ ability to manage and service that debt. Despite the sharp rise
in borrowing, lower interest rates mean that interest payments currently account for some 8%
of households’ post-tax income, well below the 15% peak recorded in 1990. Broader
measures of debt servicing costs, which include an element of principal repayment, are also
well below the level seen in the early 1990s.
Developments in the commercial property market
This strength of the residential market contrasts with conditions in the commercial sector.
Lending to commercial property companies has also been growing rapidly, at more than 20%
at an annual rate for the past year and a half. But, according to the Investment Property
Databank, rental value growth has been slowing since autumn 2000, and capital values have
been falling in absolute terms since autumn 2001. This partly reflects supply conditions –
availability has been boosted by secondary space as well as new developments – but demand
for occupational space has also weakened.
The differences between residential and commercial property mirror the current imbalances in
the UK economy, on which the MPC has had a good deal to say in its minutes. The buoyancy
of the housing market is closely associated with the strength of domestic demand; while the
relative weakness of the commercial market mirrors the retrenchment in the scale of the
operations of multinational companies in the UK, as well as the effects of the slowdown in
global demand on internationally-exposed UK companies. As with all imbalances, this
situation will eventually have to be resolved. But this need not necessarily involve a sharp
correction in residential property prices. The MPC’s central projection for activity and
inflation has been consistent with a more gradual cooling in residential demand, and some
recovery in the commercial sector on the back of an improvement in the international
economic environment.

8

The property market and the MPC
What does all this mean for monetary policy? There are some who believe that the MPC
should act now to contain what they perceive to be a dangerous ‘bubble’ in house prices. I
am not convinced by this view, for two reasons.
First, while residential house price inflation has caused some concern, and can clearly not be
sustained forever at current rates, the evidence for a bubble is not conclusive. By their very
nature, bubbles are hard for policy makers to identify, particularly at the time. I do take some
comfort however from the fact that the ratio of house prices to households’ post-tax earnings
is still well below the levels seen in the late 1980s. Of course, multiples are rather higher in
London and the South East – but it is the MPC’s job to set interest rates for the country as a
whole, not for particular regions or sectors.
The second point is that our mandate is to target RPIX inflation, not house prices. House
prices are by no means irrelevant to aggregate inflation – there are many important links
through consumers’ spending and saving decisions, as I have already discussed, and the MPC
studies the latest evidence on this at its monthly meetings. But inflation is affected by a
whole raft of other factors as well, and these also need to be taken into account in our overall
policy judgment. Even if the property market gets out of line, monetary policy adjustment is
appropriate only to the extent that property developments risk the inflation target not being
met.
On balance, my view is that the current state of the housing market does not, taken on its own,
raise undue concerns for the inflation outlook. But we need to – and will – stay alert to
developments in the data. And both we, and the markets, need to recognise that the build up
in debt creates heightened downside risks. Though debt service burdens do not appear to be
excessive at current interest rates, higher borrowing makes the household sector more
vulnerable to unexpected falls in income or increases in interest rates. Perhaps financial
innovation and greater macroeconomic stability have raised the sustainable level of debt – but
we do not know this for sure, and it is the job of central bankers to remain cautious.

9

The property market and financial stability
Let me finally say a word about financial stability, where our principal concern is that lenders
and borrowers should not become over-stretched. The larger the total debt burden, of course
the more likely it is that an adverse change in macroeconomic conditions might trigger default
by borrowers, and losses for the UK financial system. But there is little sign as yet of a major
increase in property-related defaults by borrowers or losses for banks. Nor do we think that
such an increase is likely if the current slowdown in activity proves to be short-lived, which
was the MPC’s central projection in its most recent Inflation Report. In the medium term, of
course, what matters is that both lenders and borrowers should have realistic expectations and
sufficient margins to cope with unexpectedly adverse outturns. The smaller scale of
speculative development in the commercial sector should reduce the chances of another
severe property cycle, especially if claims by lenders of improved credit practices prove to be
substantiated.
Conclusions
Hard lessons were learned after the problems in the property market in the early 1990s. There
is no evidence that these lessons have been forgotten. But central bankers are paid to worry;
and we always look for hard facts rather than simple assertions that ‘things will be different
this time’. New financing techniques give rise to new risks – for borrowers, lenders and
policy makers. And that is why the Bank will continue to monitor and assess property market
developments closely, and seek to identify potential problems. I hope I have said enough this
evening to illustrate why such analysis is directly linked to our core objectives as a central
bank.

ENDS

10

