Prudential regulation, risk management and systematic
stability
Remarks by
Alastair Clark, Adviser to the Governor, Bank of England

At the China International Banking Convention, Beijing, China
20 October 2006

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2
Introduction

It is now nearly twenty years since the first Basel Accord on bank capital standards was
agreed. During those twenty years the financial scene has changed dramatically: the volume
and value of transactions have increased many times; the speed with which transactions are
initiated and completed has accelerated; new markets have opened up, not least in the
country hosting this conference; there has been an enormous expansion in the range of
financial instruments available; financial firms have grown bigger and bigger, and
international business has become increasingly concentrated in the hands of a relatively small
number of “mega” firms with balance sheets approaching, and in some cases exceeding, a
trillion dollars.

The influences driving these developments are well known. First, the world economy
has itself grown substantially over the same period, by a factor of something like three
and a half in money terms – and financial activity typically increases faster than GDP.
Second, there has been significant liberalisation in financial markets and in the
environment for international capital flows. Third, technology has advanced
enormously in terms of both the capacity of hardware and the sophistication of
software.

One great benefit from all this activity has been a dramatic widening of the choices
available to savers and investors, borrowers and lenders, and greater flexibility and
efficiency in the allocation of capital. But it has at the same time made the world
more complicated, with ever-closer interconnections within and between individual
firms and markets. This in turn poses some serious challenges for firms themselves,
in running their businesses and identifying and managing the risks they face, and for
the financial authorities, who are responsible for maintaining the overall stability of
the system and trying to ensure that financial markets and financial firms operate
prudently and fairly.

Financial stability

Many factors contribute to the stability or otherwise of the financial system. Perhaps
the most important is stability in the macro-economic environment. History shows

3
that episodes of financial instability have often originated in poorly-judged macroeconomic policies or failure to respond appropriately to external macro-economic
shocks. But financial stability also depends on having a robust structural framework
within which to carry out financial business. That means, for example, a reliable legal
environment which ensures that contracts are clear and enforceable, an effective
regulatory regime which is not unnecessarily burdensome but ensures that the public
interest in the behaviour of financial firms is properly taken into account, an
infrastructure which ensures that transactions once entered into are completed in a
reliable and timely way, and an approach to disclosure which provides accurate
information promptly to all interested parties.

This is a very broad territory and in my brief comments this morning I am going to
focus on just one part of it – prudential regulation and risk management – and on three
particular questions. These questions have one thing in common - they are all
concerned with the way behaviour at the level of the individual firm can influence the
behaviour of the financial system as a whole. The questions are:
•

how far is the new Basel II regime likely to reinforce cyclical changes in credit
conditions?

•

how significant is the shift in banking practice, from “initiate-and-hold” to
“initiate-and-distribute”, in terms of the overall management of credit risk?

•

what about liquidity?

Procyclicality

Almost any kind of regulatory capital regime has the potential to generate or reinforce
cyclical effects in bank lending. As economic conditions deteriorate, the level of
provisions and write-offs is likely to rise with a corresponding reduction in banks’
capital base. If lending is capital-constrained, this may lead to a tightening of lending
conditions. And conversely, when the economy is strong, loan losses decrease and
banks’ capital tends to rise, allowing a faster expansion of lending.

There are, however, a lot of “ifs” in this argument, including most obviously the
question of whether banks do in fact run their business with capital at or just above
the regulatory minimum. In practice, certainly in countries where the banking sector

4
is subject to strong market discipline, they do not. For the most part, they aim to
maintain levels of capital significantly above, and in some cases very significantly
above, what the letter of the regulatory rules requires.

Basel II, however, introduces a further effect which at least in principle might act to
increase cyclical swings in behaviour. Under Basel I, risk weights were assigned on
an essentially static basis depending mainly on a sectoral classification of individual
loans. Under Basel II, in contrast, not only does the capital of a bank tend to fluctuate
with the economic cycle – higher in good times, lower in bad – but the measure of
risk-weighted assets also fluctuates, typically declining when the economy is strong
and increasing when it is weak. These two effects reinforce each other and, taken
together, clearly have the potential to generate more pronounced cyclical swings in
credit conditions.

This feature of Basel II was recognised during negotiations on the new Accord, but
the extent of its potential impact was perhaps not fully taken on board until relatively
late on. This is not the occasion to get into the details of “through-the-cycle” versus
“point-in-time” loan ratings, although initially at least the designers of Basel II were
probably thinking more in terms of the former, “through-the-cycle”, approach. Faced,
however, with the banks’ own practice, which varies but is often focussed on
relatively short-term projections of credit risk, the approach to loan ratings which has
in the end been followed is closer to the “point-in-time” version, with the
corresponding potential for larger cyclical fluctuations.

The key question, however, is whether all this analysis of what might happen in
theory is likely to hold good in practice. Many studies have been carried out aimed at
providing an answer without, I think it is fair to say, arriving at any definitive
conclusion. Some of these studies suggest that regulatory capital requirements could
fluctuate overall by as much as 40% between peaks and troughs of the cycle, and by
considerably more than that for some components of banks’ loan portfolios. At the
same time, the relatively benign and stable economic conditions which have been
sustained in many economies over the past decade or more have led to figures for
regulatory capital under Basel II which are sometimes significantly below those

5
indicated by the existing Basel I regime. The numbers in the new Accord remain
however to be reviewed, at least at the level of detail, in the light of experience.

But regulatory requirements are not necessarily the factor bearing most directly on the
capital which banks, especially major international banks, seek to maintain.
Participation in certain markets – for example swaps and repo – in practice requires
capital to be well above the regulatory minimum and is heavily dependent on a bank’s
credit rating. The impact of Basel II will therefore depend importantly on how market
counterparties, rating agencies, investment analysts and commentators interpret the
new numbers. How far will they distinguish between structural and cyclical factors?
How much of a buffer “on average” might banks be expected to hold? These
uncertainties are increased further by the recent introduction of new international
accounting standards which can have a material effect on traditional financial
measures.

In some countries, though, market discipline is not very strong and this puts more
weight on supervisory oversight. Basel II makes provision for the exercise of
supervisory discretion through its so-called “Pillar II”, which allows supervisors to
encourage or require banks to build up buffers of capital in good times against the
prospect that capital requirements may rise substantially if or when economic
conditions deteriorate. This of course implies that buffers should be just that – in
other words that they should not be regarded as a permanent part of the capital
requirement but should be allowed to move up and down as conditions change. To
put this into practice, however, means taking a view on the cyclical environment
which firms face, not just in their home territory but, for international firms, across the
whole of their business. This is a judgment which, for a variety of reasons of both
principle and practice, financial and specifically supervisory authorities may find it
difficult to make.

On the basis that regulatory capital requirements can have some cyclical impact, there
remains an important question about what, if any, policy response is indicated. The
fact that the effect arises from regulatory rules does not in itself imply that the
appropriate response is through some modification of those rules. Many factors
contribute to cyclicality in the economy and a variety of instruments, including

6
monetary policy, may be available to address them. But the effect of monetary policy
may be constrained because, for example:
•

while tighter monetary policy may rein back lending, looser monetary policy
may not be so effective in stimulating lending. This is essentially because
monetary policy has a more direct effect on liquidity conditions than on
capital. There was some evidence of this asymmetry in the United States in
the early 1990s and more recently in Japan.

•

use of monetary policy to try to stabilise credit conditions may not sit easily
with some monetary policy frameworks, including the use of inflation
targeting.

Overall, this suggests that it would be premature to contemplate further policy action
now to address cyclicality issues arising from Basel II but that, as experience with the
new regime accumulates for firms but also for regulators, it is an issue which needs to
be kept under review.

Credit risk transfer and bank intermediation

The importance of Basel II from the point of view of its wider economic implications
arises because banks typically remain the principal channel of financial intermediation
and the principal source of credit for the economy as a whole. At the same time,
recent years have seen extremely rapid growth in instruments and markets which
allow the transfer of credit risk both within the banking sector and to investors outside
the sector. Although reliable and comprehensive data on credit risk transfer is not
available, recent surveys by, for example, the British Bankers Association (BBA) and
Fitch Ratings indicate just how rapid that growth has been. From almost nothing in
the mid-1990s, the BBA estimate that the credit derivatives market had expanded to
about $1 trn by 2000; and that the gross outstanding stock of credit derivatives of
various kinds has now reached $20 trn. This compares with a figure for the overall
credit exposures of the global banking sector of perhaps $30-35 trn.

At least on the face of it, these developments might prompt the question whether
regulatory capital requirements against banks’ credit exposures now really matter very
much. After all, if banks are selling on a significant part of these exposures, how

7
important from a wider economic perspective is the capital charge against what is
left? I think this would, however, go too far.
•

First, the figures I have quoted for credit derivatives are gross, whereas what
matters more from the point of view of risk redistribution is the net position.
The net figures are certainly much smaller.

•

Second, despite stories about “leakage”, for example to hedge funds and
insurance companies, much of the risk redistribution seems to be within the
banking sector. To that extent, while the nature of the banks’ assets may
change, the character of the underlying exposures may not. This does
however highlight the fact that conventional credit exposures on the loan book
may increasingly be reappearing as market exposures in the trading book, and
highlights the importance of the Basel Trading Book Review, which addresses
inter alia credit exposures arising from trading activities.

•

Third, some of the institutions which have been significant absorbers of credit
exposure in the recent past may not be able or prepared to continue in that role
if credit conditions change sharply; and furthermore many of these “new”
lenders may have neither the appetite nor the capacity to provide credit to
some parts of the economy, notably small firms. For that reason too, the
position of the banks is likely to remain of central importance.

•

Finally, one of the key functions of banks is the assessment of credit risk based
on a good knowledge of borrowers. For the largest companies, much of the
relevant information may be in the public domain – especially if they are
issuers of publicly-traded bonds and have a credit rating – and therefore the
comparative advantage of banks in making credit assessments may be limited.
But for smaller borrowers this will usually not be the case and the detailed
credit assessment capacity of the banks has a real role to play. From the point
of view of public policy, the question of whether credit risk transfer could
impair the overall capability for credit risk assessment – because the
knowledge of borrowers available to the originator of loans may not be
available to those who end up holding the credit risk – is one which merits
further investigation.

In sum, therefore, and despite developments in credit risk transfer, bank lending and
therefore bank regulatory capital standards seem certain to remain an important part

8
of the picture for the foreseeable future. But monitoring developments in credit risk
transfer – both the scale and to whom the credit risk is being transferred – will clearly
also deserve close attention.

Liquidity

The third and last of the topics I am going to touch on this morning is liquidity.

The term “liquidity” is ambiguous and the concept is not an easy one to analyse. At
the level of markets, it means the capacity to execute transactions without significant
shifts in the price; at the level of firms, it means the capacity to acquire cash so as to
meet obligations as they fall due. One striking thing about the recent international
debate on prudential regulatory standards is that liquidity, in contrast to capital, has
received relatively little attention. Certainly – and some may judge this no bad thing!
– we are a long way from anything remotely corresponding to a Basel Accord for
liquidity.

One of the main problems in analysing liquidity is that liquidity conditions are, to use
the jargon, endogenous - that is, the liquidity conditions facing one market participant
depend crucially on the behaviour of other market participants. And, to make matters
more difficult still, market participants are likely to behave “strategically” – that is,
their behaviour will reflect guesses about what other market participants will do.
This contrasts with the situation in relation to capital requirements against credit risk
which depend much more on developments in exogenous conditions, such as
fluctuations in economic activity.

In any event, the question of liquidity regulation was not addressed, except in a very
general way, in Basel II. It would clearly be unwise, however, to conclude that
liquidity is unimportant, either for the robustness of individual firms or the stability of
the financial system as a whole. In the end, banks fail because they run out of cash;
and while private money markets may now be much deeper than in the past, so that
solvent banks should be able to access liquidity against good collateral, there are
nevertheless sufficient uncertainties in this process, especially during times of stress,
to make prudent liquidity management a top priority.

9

But as well as the broad prudential reasons for taking an interest in how banks go
about their liquidity management, there are more specific reasons for a public policy
interest. The ultimate source of liquidity in most economies is the central bank. Its
operating procedures have a crucial impact on the environment for commercial banks’
own liquidity management. The central bank is also typically the Lender of Last
Resort. The existence of this backstop has the potential to induce moral hazard –
meaning that banks may become less careful with their liquidity management, and
their financial management generally, than they would be if the backstop were not
available. For that reason, some oversight of banks’ behaviour in this area seems
justified – but there is no broadly accepted model of how this should be carried out.
Developing such a model would mean tackling not only the theoretical difficulties I
referred to a moment ago but also a number of practical issues – for example, whether
to focus on a consolidated group position or individual legal entities, whether to
distinguish liquidity positions in different currencies, how to integrate liquidity held
as a requirement for payment system membership with overall liquidity requirements,
and how to combine limits on maturity mismatches with requirements on stocks of
liquid assets.

This set of issues clearly has an important international dimension, especially in
relation to so-called Large Complex Financial Institutions, which operate in many
different countries. The issues concern not just what the “rules of the game” should
be in times of market stability but how liquidity pressures should be handled, and by
whom, in times of crisis. The Basel Committee is beginning to engage in a limited
discussion on liquidity, starting essentially with a mapping of current national
practice. In addition, the European Commission has launched a study of liquidityrelated issues as part of its effort to integrate further European financial markets. But
these represent only very early steps. The question of whether there would be merit
in some international understanding on liquidity management, and if so what form
that might take, is still to be resolved.

10
Concluding remarks

As I emphasised at the beginning of these remarks, risk identification, risk
measurement and risk management have become increasing challenges in an ever
more complex and interconnected global financial system. The three issues I have
picked out are just a few of those which practitioners and the authorities face. All of
them seem to me important and on each there is still much to do. I hope my remarks
this morning have indicated why we think they are important – and, given the speed
with which financial innovation spreads, important not just for the UK or international
markets but important also for fast-developing markets in emerging economies.

ENDS

