Putting up a fence
Speech given by
James Proudman
Executive Director, UK Deposit Takers Supervision, Prudential Regulation Authority,
Bank of England

British Bankers’ Association, Pinners Hall, London
16 June 2017

I am extremely grateful to Richard Bennett and Lindsey Dawkes for effectively writing this speech and
to David Eacott, Julian Gray, Alex Holmes, Duncan Mackinnon, Richard Newman and several others
for their assistance in preparing these remarks.
Our interactive guide explains how ring-fencing makes the financial system safer and how it will affect
the public.

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

Introduction
Work is underway - out of sight and behind the scenes - to build a large new part of the United Kingdom’s
vital infrastructure. Once complete, the programme will deliver significant improvements to the public. The
next 18 months will be crucial for its construction, with little scope for slippage, or room for divergence from
plans, in order to succeed by the 2019 deadline.

You might be forgiven for thinking that I am about to give a speech on the Crossrail engineering project
about which much of the above is true. To be clear, I am not: improving journey times across London and
easing congestion are not part of the PRA’s objectives. Crossrail does, however, provide something of an
analogy for the real subject of this speech – and something that certainly does form part of the PRA’s
objectives – building the ring-fence around the UK banking system.

Like Crossrail, ring-fencing is a major infrastructure programme that forms part of a broader strategy of
co-ordinated improvements. Both programmes faced extensive periods of public consultation and detailed
planning before building began. Both will largely be built behind the scenes, or underground, with certain
visible exceptions like the new Crossrail station at Canary Wharf or the sort code changes that will result
from ring-fencing.

Like Crossrail, ring-fencing is seeking to deliver wide-reaching benefits to the public. Ring-fencing aims to
improve the resilience of the largest UK banks to enhance financial stability, to maintain the provision of core
UK banking services used by individuals and small businesses, and to help protect taxpayers from any
further bank bail-outs.

Both programmes face a high degree of delivery risk that all involved are seeking to monitor and mitigate.
And, like Crossrail, ring-fencing is coming soon.

Why a fence is needed and who it is for

Let me begin with a reminder of why the ring-fence is needed, and for whom it is intended.

Ten years on from the start of the financial crisis, the United Kingdom is well advanced in implementing the
wide-ranging international and domestic reforms aimed at fixing the causes of that crisis, and reducing the
likelihood of another. New standards have been introduced to strengthen the resilience of the banking
system, and to help solve the too-big-to-fail problem whereby it was too costly to allow banks to fail in the
same way as any other company in the private sector could. These standards include the introduction of: the
Basel framework for systemically important banks and the Systemic Risk Buffer, which sets higher capital
requirements for those banks to increase their capacity to absorb stress; the regular concurrent stress-tests
for the UK’s largest banks and building societies to test their resilience; and the implementation of the EU’s
2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

2

Banking Recovery and Resolution Directive, including new requirements for UK banks and building societies
to ensure sufficient funds are available to recapitalise any continuing parts of the business if the group, or
part of it, were to fail. Overall, the largest banks are now required to hold very significantly more capital than
before the crisis.

The implementation of the ring-fence is a key component of the post-crisis reforms in the United Kingdom.
As the Governor recently said, “efficient resilience is why we are ring-fencing the domestic banking services
1

on which UK households and companies depend.” Building on the recommendations published by the
2

Independent Commission on Banking (ICB) in 2011, the requirements of the ring-fence were enacted by
3

the Government through legislation . Ring-fencing addresses the problem that arises from universal banks
that allow investment and international banking activities to be placed on the same balance sheet as the
critical functions of lending, deposit-taking and payment services for retail and small corporate customers.
This increases the risks to the provision of those critical functions, and potentially puts tax payers on the
hook to save the whole bank, if things go wrong in the investment bank or the global economy.

The 2013 Banking Reform Act requires UK banks to separate - or ring-fence - the provision of the core from
4

other so called ‘excluded’ and ‘prohibited’ activities within the group by 1 January 2019 – the date on which
the legislation takes effect. This separation supported by, for example, the introduction of a separate board
for the ring-fenced bank that is able to make decisions independently of the rest of the group, will ensure that
the business of the banks inside the fence is carried out in a way that protects, in both good times and bad,
the provision of those core banking and payment services for UK retail customers and small businesses.
And if the worst were to happen again, groups subject to ring-fencing will have group structures that are less
inter-dependent and easier to resolve.

The legislation allows for proportionate application and recognises that not all banks are likely to conduct
excluded activities. Building societies are not in the scope of the legislation, nor are banks with less than
£25bn of core retail deposits. As it stands, only the five largest UK banking groups and some of their
rapidly-expanding competitors will be in scope on 1 January 2019. These competitors in general face a
smaller restructuring task, as their retail focus means they conduct few, if any, excluded activities.
Nonetheless, separating activities in the large and complex banking groups is generating, arguably, the
largest ever discrete change to the structure of the UK banking system, with banks accounting for
approximately 75% of UK retail deposits being re-engineered over the next 18 months.

1

Mark Carney, The high road to a responsible, open financial system, 7 April 2017
Independent Commission on Banking: Final Report, 2011, Sir John Vickers
3
The Financial Services (Banking Reform) Act 2013
4
The Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (Excluded Activities and Prohibitions) Order 2014 sets out excluded activities (i.e.
activities that must not be conducted by firms inside the ring-fence) as dealing in investments as principal and commodities trading.
Firms inside the ring-fence are prohibited from accessing a payment system indirectly, incurring an exposure to a relevant financial
institution (as defined in Part 3 of the Order), and holding non-EEA branches or subsidiaries. To ensure proportionate application, the
Order also includes various exceptions and a transitional provision.
2

3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

3

Designing the fence
Responsibility for implementing the Banking Reform Act – that is, successfully putting up the ring-fence on
time - lies fairly and squarely with the banks themselves.

As for the PRA, the legislation has given us a specific objective to ensure that ring-fenced banks conduct
business in a way that protects the provision of core banking and payment services in the UK, and insulates
them from shocks that may arise in the rest of the group or from global or wholesale banking markets. This
new objective is part of and fits within the PRA’s overarching objective of safety and soundness. Detailed
rules have been written to guide and support firms’ ring-fencing plans – the PRA has consulted on and
published three policy statements as required by, and as a supplement to the legislation, with rules covering,
amongst other things, legal structures and governance arrangements; prudential requirements and
intra-group arrangements; and reporting requirements. Work is also being undertaken by the FCA and other
regulators to support those foundations, in line with their own statutory responsibilities.

Meanwhile, the PRA has been working with banks to understand their ring-fencing plans and their
implications for our objectives. In line with the flexibility intended by the ICB, and built into the PRA’s
ring-fencing rules, each bank is adopting its own approach to meeting the legislative requirements - reflecting
the differences in firms’ strategies and expected future business models. Firms with predominantly
UK-focused retail banking activities are opting to build a “wide” ring-fence that will house the bulk of
activities, with only the relatively small rump of prohibited activities outside. Other firms with large
international or investment banking activities have opted to build a “narrow” ring-fence, with the majority of
corporate banking activities conducted outside the fence. Irrespective of the location of the ring-fence, the
legislation is designed to allow ring-fenced banks to continue to reap the benefits of being part of a larger
group, which would not have been possible if complete legal separation had been required.

Building the fence

The scale of the change required by 2019 means that the banks are already implementing their plans. For
some, this includes seeking authorisation for the new legal entities that will enable them to house their
banking activities either inside or outside the fence. By 2019, the PRA is expecting to have authorised the
three largest new banks ever created in the United Kingdom. Change on this scale must be planned and
delivered carefully, and so is expected to have cost the industry several billion pounds in total by 2019.

Separating the ring-fenced banks into distinct legal entities is not, however, sufficient to ensure ring-fenced
banks conduct business in a way that protects core banking services: which is, after all, the intention of the
legislation. Strong arrangements are necessary at board level to ensure that the ring-fenced banks can take
decisions independently both in times of crisis and, in good times, to maintain the integrity of the ring-fence.
Where conflicts of interest do arise, firms are expected to be able to identify and manage these.
4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

4

The ability to act independently does not stop at board level, but - to be effective – needs to permeate
throughout the organisation. Banks' IT systems, not always easy to change even at the best of times, need
to be re-configured to enable the ring-fenced banks’ financial ledgers to be distinct. And transactions and
services (including HR, property, security etc.) across the ring-fence need to be negotiated on arms' length
terms.

To be able to act independently also pre-supposes a certain level of financial independence. The viability of
a ring-fenced bank needs to be sufficiently separated from that of the broader group. There would be no
point in having the legal and governance separation if, in practice, the business models were so
5

intertwined - or intragroup exposures so great - that one could not operate without the other. Firms' access
to key payment and clearing systems is a prime example. Ring-fencing requires extensive engineering by
some banks, together with the Bank of England and others, to re-work the essential plumbing of payment
system connections and access. For similar reasons, ring-fenced banks will need their own capital and
pools of liquid assets to be able to stand resiliently on their own.

The Bank of England will require full and prompt implementation of the ring-fencing legislation and
requirements by 2019. To achieve this, much work must be completed by the banks within a limited
timeframe. While the timelines vary, all banks plan to meet this tight deadline, with the bulk of restructuring
activities planned from now to mid-2018. As with any big infrastructure project, there is some potential for
disruption to everyday activities as new group structures are moved into place and new ways of operating
are brought on-line. The banks’ progress on implementing the ring-fence, and the risks arising from that
work, will continue to be managed closely by the banks and monitored by the PRA and the FCA until all the
requisite work is complete.

In short, there is a lot to be done.

What to look out for as the fence goes up

Much of the essential work should not be readily apparent to the wider public. To echo Sam Woods,
“Implementation will often pass the public by. That’s OK – so long as households and businesses get a
resilient and reliable service from the financial system.”

6

But some elements of the building work will be

visible. Customers of different banks may be affected in different ways. So what is there to look out for as
the fence goes up? Today, I would like to mention two issues: changes to sort codes, and transfers of
7

business .

5

Including pensions. Under the legislation, pensions separation is subject to delayed implementation by 2026.
Sam Woods, The revolution is over. Long live the revolution!, 26 Oct 16, Mansion House, London
7
See Part VII of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000
6

5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

5

First, a sort code is the six digit number that has traditionally been attached to each of our bank accounts to
identify the account not just with our bank, but also with a specific branch or product. As the ring-fence goes
up, the banks will need to allocate each to one side of the fence or the other. And that means some
customers could, in the absence of additional change, find themselves on the wrong side of the fence. To
address this, the banks have put in place major programmes to re-allocate accounts to the right side of the
fence. The banks estimate that almost a million retail and corporate customers will see changes to their sort
codes. Banks will inform those customers that their sort code details are changing, when the change will
take place and if there is anything they need to do. Some people may already have been contacted by their
banks. To minimise the disruption these changes could cause to customers, banks will ensure that any
outgoing payments, for example standing orders and Direct Debits, are made as normal. Banks and
payment schemes will also redirect any incoming payments to the new account details. This critical work is
being closely overseen by the FCA and PRA.

Second, the transfers of business. Some banks will need to move the assets and liabilities of significant
numbers of customers from one legal entity into another to comply with the legislation. For example, a
banking group that creates a new banking entity to house the ring-fenced activities will need to transfer into it
the assets and liabilities of those customers it wishes to place inside the ring-fence. To do so, banks can
8

use a transfer of business process called a ring-fencing transfer scheme , where a judge will decide whether
the transfer may proceed. In doing so, the Court will consider the impact of the scheme on customers and
9

others, and whether that impact is reasonable for achieving compliance with the legislation . The Court
process is expected to begin in late 2017 and last into 2018. As part of that process, customers may receive
communications from their banks explaining the proposed moves and the Court process that will facilitate
them. The completion of these transfers will require co-ordination between banks, their customers and
counterparties, the Courts, the PRA, the FCA and the independent experts reviewing the schemes on behalf
of the Court.
Against the back-drop of other regulatory, accounting and business model changes – not the least of which
is Brexit – it is easy to see that the banks in scope of ring-fencing are facing significant restructuring
challenges. The steps the banks must take to implement the ring-fence by 2019 are interdependent, so
delays in one area – should they occur – may knock-on to become bigger delays in other areas. The Bank
of England is working with banks to ensure they have suitable contingency plans in place to meet ringfencing requirements by 2019 even if delays do occur.

8

A ring-fenced transfer scheme (RFTS) is a modified form of Part VII transfer of business process available to firms that will be subject
to ring-fencing from 2019 to use for the purposes of creating the separation of activities mandated by the ring-fencing legislation.
9
For each RFTS an independent expert will be engaged to write a report for the Court that seeks to assess the statutory question: “…
whether persons other than the transferor concerned are likely to be adversely affected by the scheme, and if so, whether the adverse
effect is likely to be greater than is reasonably necessary in order to achieve whichever of the purposes mentioned in section 106B(3) is
relevant”. This report will form part of the evidence on which the Court will rely in determining whether it is appropriate for it to sanction
the scheme. See section 109A of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000.
6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

6

The risks associated with introducing these changes, however, are outweighed by the long-run benefits of
increasing banks’ resilience and resolvability.

Once the fence is up

Completing the ring-fence on 1 January 2019 will be a major step towards implementing the package of
post-crisis reforms, but the work will not stop there. Achieving the intended outcomes of ring-fencing will be
a continuous, daily process – not a one-off event. For the banks themselves, this will require ensuring a
clear line of sight of the ring-fence for both regulators and analysts to monitor, through regular reporting and
disclosure obligations. As for the PRA, we are considering how to supervise banks with ring-fenced
structures and whether this will require changes to our current supervisory approach and operating model.
Not the least of our responsibilities will be the requirement to produce an annual report to Parliament publicly
10

setting out the extent to which the banks have complied with the ring-fencing provisions . Further to this,
11

where we find a firm is not complying, we have new group restructuring , or “electrification” powers, which
enable the PRA to initiate a number of changes to a banking group subject to ring-fencing, if certain
conditions are met. This is an important structural foundation provided by the legislation to set the right
incentives for banks to comply.

Conclusion

Constructing the ring-fence is a critical infrastructure project, remedying a major flaw in the previous financial
architecture by insulating retail banking from risks arising outside the fence. This will contribute to a safer,
more resilient and more resolvable banking system for the future – and like the successful opening of
Crossrail, the completion of the ring-fence in 2019 will have been worthy of the building work taking place.

10
11

See paragraph 19 of Schedule 1ZB of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000
See sections 142K and 142L of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000
7

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

7

