“Recent Developments and Challenges in the Foreign
Exchange Market” – Speech by Paul Fisher
Speech given by
Paul Fisher, Head of Foreign Exchange Division, Bank of England

At the FX-week Foreign Exchange Congress
21 November 2002

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

1

Recent Developments and Challenges in the Foreign Exchange Market
Paul Fisher
Head of Foreign Exchange Division, Bank of England
It is a great pleasure – indeed an honour – for me to be able to kick-off the inaugural FX-week Foreign
Exchange Congress. I'd like to start by saying a bit about my role as Head of the Foreign Exchange
Division at the Bank of England, which I took over from Clifford Smout at Easter this year. We cover a
wide range of markets – foreign exchange, foreign currency money and bond markets, and gold; and
we carry out a wide range of functions. Our operations involve transactions on behalf our government
and central bank customers, including acting as investment managers for the UK government’s foreign
exchange reserves, with a portfolio totalling around $40 billion at present. We are involved both in
asset management and foreign exchange dealing. Using our knowledge of the market we provide
information on market developments to policymakers, including the Monetary Policy Committee. We
monitor financial stability issues, remaining alert to stresses and strains in the markets. Personally I
chair the Foreign Exchange Joint Standing Committee, which brings together many of the leading
practitioners in London, not just bankers and brokers but also the Association of Corporate Treasurers
and other industry groups. It is these various roles – both as policy makers and as users of the market –
which govern our perspective on developments in foreign exchange.
In this keynote address I would like to highlight some of the more important changes we have recently
been witness to, in particular those which have followed the introduction of more advanced technology
and new systems. Many of these changes will, of course, be discussed in detail during the sessions of
this Congress over the next two days. Improvements introduced by market participants will be
motivated by a variety of factors including reducing costs and improving the services offered to
customers, but the particular factor that I would like to emphasise in my remarks is the impact of these
changes on the management and reduction of risk – for both the buy-side and the sell-side. Risk
management is, of course, one of the major functions of financial markets in general, but particularly
for the foreign exchange market which is essential not just for the trading of goods and services, but
financial assets on a global basis. Although the major impact of recent developments has been both to
reduce operational risk substantially and to improve the management of market, credit and liquidity
risk, I would also like to spend a little time on those operational risks which remain and one or two
which may even have been accentuated. Before getting on to these issues however, I would like to
spend a short while reviewing movements in asset prices over the year to date, to put some of the
market structure developments into context.
Financial markets in 2002 have been dominated by developments in the global macroeconomic cycle in particular the continued downward adjustment in expectations of US growth and the associated
correction in global equity markets associated with that adjustment; initially in the IT and telecoms
sectors and then spreading into a more general bear market. Since the start of the year the NASDAQ
fell some 43% to its low point in October for example, the FT-SE 100 fell by around 30% and the Dow

2

Jones by around 27% (see Chart 1). All three indices have since recovered somewhat from those lows
but the equity markets remain volatile.

Chart 1: Equity Indices
01/01/02=100
110
100
Dow Jones
90
80
FT-SE 100
70
60

Nasdaq

50
Jan-02

Feb-02

Apr-02

May-02

Jul-02

Sep-02

Oct-02

Chart 2: Dow Jones Industrial Average and US 10 yr Treasury

6

01/01/02=100
110

%

100
Dow Jone s (rhs)

5

90

US 10yr (lhs)
80
4

70
60

3
Jan-02

Feb-02

Apr-02

May-02

Jul-02

Sep-02

Oct-02

50
Dec-02

Bond markets have been trading in direct negative correlation with equity markets for much of the
year, with yields generally falling, supported by low and stable policy rates (see Chart 2). The US 10
year treasury yield, for example, is some 100bps lower at around 4%. Implied (and actual) volatilities
derived from option prices in bond and equity markets have been rising and are close to historical highs
(see Chart 3). Equity markets have been impacted by corporate scandals and markets more generally
by geopolitical risks. In contrast the foreign exchange market – at least in the most heavily traded

3

Chart 3: Equity, Interest rate and FX volatility
%
45
40
Equity

35
30
25
20
15
10
Interest Rate

FX

5
0

Nov-94

May-96

Nov-97

May-99

Nov-00

May-02

Equity is average of DAX, FTSE100, SPX and Nikkei implied volatility; Interest Rate is average of 2nd contract short-sterling, eurodollar and
euribor implied volatility; FX is average of euro-dollar, dollar-yen, cable, dollar-swiss and dollar-cad one-month implied volatility. Source
Bloomberg, UBS Warburg.

currencies – has been more stable. Implied volatilities from the foreign exchange market were close to
historical lows in April and are only a little higher now. In the Summer issue of the Bank of England
Quarterly Bulletin, we included a short piece by one of our analysts, Robert Hillman, which reflected
on this contrary behaviour. He concluded that possibly the best explanation was that economic shocks
have been sufficiently global in nature that, whilst generating plenty of uncertainty about the level of
equity prices or interest rates across markets, they have affected the major economies in a similar
fashion implying relatively little about exchange rates. Although implied volatilities in foreign
exchange picked up for a while during the early summer, that recovery has proven to be short-lived.

Chart 4: G3 Exchange Rates

110

$/¥ inverted scale

$/€
$/€ (rhs)

115

1.04
1.02
1
0.98

120

0.96

US$ depreciation

0.94

125
$/¥ (lhs)

0.92

130

0.9
0.88

135

0.86
140
Jan-02

0.84
Apr-02

Jul-02

Oct-02

4

We have nevertheless seen some significant changes in the levels of exchange rates (see Chart 4). The
year started with anticipation of economic recovery led by the US. As it became clear that recovery in
US growth might take longer than the initial, rather optimistic market expectations, and equity markets
started to slide, a growing concern could be perceived in the market about the ability of the US to
continue to attract the necessary inflows of capital to fund a current account deficit equivalent to some
5% of GDP. Eventually, this re-appraisal of prospects by the market led to the dollar depreciating
significantly against the euro and yen, moving from Spring highs of 0.86 and 135 on euro-dollar and
dollar-Yen respectively to lows of 1.02 and 115. While the long-awaited recovery of euro-dollar to
parity was publicly welcomed by officials in Europe, the strengthening of the Yen was clearly a
concern for the Japanese authorities and the market saw substantial foreign exchange intervention on
several occasions, not least leading up to the turning point for dollar-yen in July.

Chart 5: Sterling ERI
1990=100

120
115
110
105
100
95
90
85
80

Jan-92

Sep-94

Jun-97

Mar-00

Sterling initially weakened in the face of the euro-dollar move: Cable appreciated from around 1.41 to
recent highs of over 1.59, but this was dominated by a depreciation against the euro from under 0.61 to
over 0.65. As the sterling ERI fell from 107.8 to 102.8, it looked as though the near six-year strength
of sterling might be about to fade (see Chart 5). But, as it recovered against the euro, sterling soon
moved back into a range where it has been for much of the last three years, and for the past few months
the ERI has since been moving within +/- 2% of the average this century: 106.5 starting from Jan 1st
2000!
Market reports suggest that sterling and the Swedish krona have both been affected from time-to-time
by euro convergence plays as have the currencies of the East European accession countries. Roberto
Schiavi from the ECB will be talking to you tomorrow morning about euro-accession issues.

5

Further afield from sterling and the G3, we have also seen something of a search for yield, particularly
in the so-called commodity currencies – the Norwegian krone (no doubt in part reflecting the price of
oil), the Kiwi, the Australian dollar. Indeed the Norges Bank Governor was recently driven to caution
the market about the small size of Norwegian money markets and the possible consequences of a
sudden rush to exit the positions being taken. Perhaps reflecting geopolitical concerns, the Swiss franc
has also been strong and the price of gold has been relatively firm. It is also true that low foreign
exchange rate volatility in the most heavily traded currencies has not meant stability for every currency
and for some emerging market currencies this has been a most difficult year, with the Brazilian real for
example, having been as strong as 2 ¼ to the US dollar and as weak as 4. The one ‘good thing’ we can
take from their experiences is that there has been much less generalised contagion than there might
have been. Markets have been much better at differentiating between countries and currencies on the
basis of local events, economic performance and policies, rather than treating emerging markets as an
homogenous asset class.
In the context of relatively stable exchange rates and low volatility in the G3 currencies we have,
perhaps surprisingly, seen a growth of interest in foreign exchange as an asset class, with the
continuing rise of the overlay manager, managing foreign exchange risk and seeking active returns as
an element of overall fund management. Indeed the Bank of England’s dealing desk could be
characterised as providing, amongst other things, an overlay function in respect of our own reserves
management operations.
But perhaps we should not see the focus on foreign exchange as so surprising. As cross-market trading
strategies become ever more complex and derivatives markets continue to grow – both subjects to be
addressed in sessions today and tomorrow – the foreign exchange consequences of other trading
activities need to be carefully managed to control the currency risk. And in the context of lower returns
available in other financial markets, the marginal returns from currency overlay can be very appealing.
We will be hearing more about the overlay function from Momtchil Pojarliev later this morning and on
related matters from Christina Böck tomorrow.
One issue which has occurred to me from time to time this year, particularly after discussions about the
growth of overlay managers, is how everyone seems to be targeting foreign exchange as a source of
extra return – which is intriguing given that the taking of directional bets is a zero-sum game for the
market as a whole. I have sometimes put this to market participants and the quickest answer I usually
get is that the losers are the central banks!
Another major development in the market has been the creation of the Continuous-Linked Settlement
Bank. Commencing live operations on September 9, this most complicated of projects finally came to
fruition with seven initial currencies, including sterling. CLS substantially reduces overall settlement
risk by eliminating Herstatt risk on the deals settled through it. (Herstatt risk is the credit risk run when
paying away one leg of a deal before the other leg is received). This is a major improvement in risk
reduction which the world’s central bankers have strongly endorsed and encouraged. The initial phases
of live operation appear to have been successful with a steady increase in the number of transactions

6

flowing through the system and any disruptions successfully contained and CLS is now open to third
party members.
Although the introduction of CLS is a major landmark in risk reduction, it does not, of course,
eliminate all settlement risk as the coverage will not be universal in terms of currencies or market
participants in the foreseeable future, and it is still possible for trades to fail, potentially giving rise to
replacement costs or liquidity risk. And the use of In/Out swaps represent a continuing risk. I look
forward to hearing more about those issues and the experiences from a settlement member’s
perspective in the session before lunch led by Nicoletta Stella.
But perhaps the biggest changes we have seen on market structure are those created by the impact of
new technology, both on trading systems and on internal processes, helping towards to the ‘holy grail’
of straight through processing (STP).
Starting with the latter, many significant players in the market have already made big strides towards
STP – particularly the larger banks who have the resources to make the significant investment in
systems. The same technologies can provide STP in the sense of front-to-back-office and in terms of
the deal process: with some systems now capable of packaging trades across different instruments as
well. But few will have achieved 100% in either direction for all their activities – not least because
new products, new trading strategies and new services to customers become an increasing challenge to
link in to such systems. As well as improving efficiency and hopefully reducing costs, STP reduces
operational risk by reducing the amount of manual re-keying and reconciliation. But of course it places
increased responsibility on the original trade input. We have in the last few months heard of a couple
of instances of major deals ‘whip-sawing’ the markets – in both foreign exchange and equities –
because the initial trade was put in the wrong way round. It is not enough to simply blame ‘fat fingers’
for such episodes. It is up to the system providers to make sure that processes are clear and that
reasonable hurdles are in place. But still more it is up to the system users – be they market
professionals or customers – to ensure that they have proper training and appropriate levels of risk
awareness. Some of these issues I hope will be aired in the session after lunch led by Joerg Rachle.
One particular operational risk – the sort of dirty washing not often aired in public – is mistaken
settlement instructions. I would like to think that increased automation in the back office will reduce
the number of such errors but it is crucial that front offices sharpen up their act too. Dealers are often
not as clear as they should be as to exactly which legal counterparty they are dealing for and the
proliferation of legal entities with similar names within a particular institution can be a nightmare for
credit risk officers, dealers and settlement staff alike. And we have recently had an example within the
energy sector of a subsidiary company within a group being allowed to go bust – demonstrating the
importance of knowing precisely which entity one is dealing with.
On the trading side the major development has clearly been in electronic trading and I am glad to see
that this will be the subject of the first panel session this morning. I know from our own government
customers that e-trading solutions are seen as a major step forward for the buy-side – to reduce costs,

7

increase flexibility and to improve pricing transparency (through the multi-bank portals for example).
Electronic trading will generally make the market much more accessible and efficient, in many cases
helping to achieve STP, particularly for corporate and institutional fund customers. But these systems
also present their own risks: for example trade entry errors – as I mentioned just now – and liquidity
risk. There is always the risk of competing systems fragmenting market liquidity – giving a natural
tendency towards consolidation – and there is at least some anecdotal evidence of price mismatches
from auto-pricing versus wholesale inter-broker systems. Despite this, our contacts suggest that, at
least in the major currencies, liquidity is as good as ever, albeit more concentrated into particular parts
of the trading day. And it seems that larger tickets are still traded over the phone and ‘worked’ in the
market rather than entrusted to the electronic systems.
A more direct operational risk arises to the extent that some new bank-to-customer electronic systems
use prices generated from wholesale market dealing systems such as Reuters or EBS. A couple of
months ago we saw this risk crystallise when price feeds from one of the systems went down and so the
supply to some auto-pricing systems was not available. On that occasion the market appeared to cope
pretty well but it was a useful warning of the built-in dependencies on the infrastructure and the need
for contingency operations. I hope I don’t need to elaborate further on the need for proper business
continuity plans given the events of September 11, 2001.
A possible side-effect of new trading platforms and new technology is the increasing use of models by
hedge funds and CTAs, bank proprietary desks and even currency overlay managers, in some cases
operating as a black box triggering buy or sell orders when a particular price level is reached. We have
certainly felt the presence of such short-term models on particular days over the last couple of months –
particularly on days when other market participants are relatively quiet. In some of the less-traded
currencies these models may be impacting on liquidity – at times we have seen ‘gapping’ in the price
where a number of similarly configured models all try to put on the same trade at the same time.
Finally I come to the issue of consolidation. In the last triennial survey of the foreign exchange market
in April 2001, some 75% of the turnover in London was generated by just 17 banks and concentration
in the market seems to have grown since then. In most industries this would seem like quite a low level
of concentration but by historical standards in the foreign exchange market it is high. Partly this trend
will reflect the general trend towards mergers and acquisitions in the financial sector. More
specifically, it probably reflects the desire of customers to access a full range of services from fewer
suppliers and the huge investment in new systems that generate returns to scale. Of course we are also
seeing consolidation on the buy side – possibly at an even faster rate. So it is not clear how the balance
of market power is shifting. Simon Hills will be addressing the impact of this trend this afternoon. My
own observation is that consolidation and greater automation will quite likely work together – not least
to continue the reduction in numbers of back-office staff and possibly front-office staff. On the other
hand I suspect the one area of employment expansion – at least in the short-run – will continue to be
the growth of middle offices and risk managers. Although even here the improvements in systems

8

should help to cut costs. I’m sure that staff in each group will increasingly need to be better trained and
better able to add value through complex bespoke services rather than simply executing manual tasks.
One further consequence of consolidation may be the lack of liquidity in some of the less-traded
currencies as it becomes increasingly difficult for the smaller niche banks that currently undertake
much of that business to compete. This could be an issue of genuine concern for the countries
concerned and one for which efficient markets ought to be able to find a solution.
Well, hoping for efficient markets to find their own solutions is generally a good note on which a
central banker can finish his speech. In summary, the structure of the foreign exchange market is
developing at a rapid pace. That brings both new opportunities and new risks. I am confident that the
market will meet these challenges in the future as it has in the past, and I am looking forward to hearing
more about how that will happen from the speakers over the next two days.

21 November 2002

