Bank of England

Page 1

Reflections on DeFi, Digital
Currencies and Regulation −
speech by Jon Cunliffe
Given at Warwick Business School’s Gilmore Centre Policy Forum
Conference on DeFi & Digital Currencies
21 November 2022

Bank of England

Page 2

Speech
I had intended today to talk about the work the Bank of England, is doing with the
Treasury, the FCA on the regulation of crypto stablecoins and our work on a potential
central bank digital currency in Sterling.
That remains the bulk of what I will talk about today. But between beginning to draft these
remarks and delivering them today, we have seen what is probably the largest – and
certainly the most spectacular – failure to date in the crypto ecosystem, by which of course
I mean the collapse of the crypto trading platform FTX and most of its associated
businesses.
So I thought it might be worthwhile to start with a brief look at the FTX implosion to frame
some of the points I intend to make on regulation of the use of crypto-related technologies
to provide financial services and on why, as a central bank, we are actively exploring the
issuance of a digitally native Pound sterling.
Untangling exactly what happened at FTX will no doubt take a great deal of time, effort
and investigation by the relevant authorities. For anyone interested in the scale of the
challenge, I can only recommend a quick read of last week’s bankruptcy filing. But while
we will not know in full how it happened for some time, there do appear to be some
general themes that are very familiar to those who regulate and supervise conventional
financial firms and financial instruments.
The first are fundamental issues around how financial institutions should be organised, by
which I mean their corporate structure, governance, internal controls and record keeping.
Regardless of the financial service activity – be it banking, insurance, exchanges, clearing
houses – regulation in the conventional financial sector imposes stringent/substantive
requirements. Supervision aims to ensure that these are implemented.
These requirements reflect the risks inherent in financial services – risks to the users, risks
to other financial firms and risks more broadly to the financial system. Technology in and
of itself does not change the need for transparency in corporate structures, governance,
audit and systems and controls – for example to protect customers’ funds.
In a similar vein, and to prevent conflicts of interest, regulation imposes requirements and
constraints on the connections between a financial firm and its affiliates, while also
requiring controllers to be fit and proper. In this respect, transparency in corporate
structures and the relationships between them is the key foundation.

Bank of England

Page 3

The connections between activities carried out within the firm matter also. Lending,
brokering, providing an exchange platform, clearing and settlement perform different
economic functions that carry different risks.
For financial market infrastructure firms, such as a central counterparty or an exchange or
custody of assets (both/all of which activities FTX sought to undertake, the regulatory
system and international standards in place aim to stop these important pieces of financial
market infrastructure from taking on credit/liquidity/market risk beyond what is absolutely
necessary to discharge their core functions. Where they happen within one group,
regulation requires separate, independent governance, to ensure the risks inherent in each
is properly managed.1
FTX, along with a number of other centralised crypto trading platforms, appear to operate
as conglomerates, bundling products and functions within one firm. In conventional finance
these functions are either separated into different entities or managed with tight controls
and ring-fences.
It is worth noting that this bundling appears to have been primarily organisational rather
than technological – that is to say, the functions were offered by different parts of the FTX
group but were not bundled in the sense of being run as one single piece of code
performing multiple functions. I will return to the question of integration of functions in
smart contracts later on.
I have mentioned some familiar regulation issues around the organisation and governance
of conventional financial firms. There appear, in the FTX case, also to be familiar issues
around the financial instruments involved. Collateral performs a variety of vital function in
financial services. It protects lending counterparties from credit risk. It can also serve as
margin in clearing processes. The higher the credit quality and lower the volatility of assets
used as collateral, the better suited it is to serving as assurance against risk. For this
reason, there are stringent, material conditions on collateral that can accepted, for
example, in central counterparty clearing.
Unbacked cryptoassets are highly volatile, given that they have no intrinsic value. They are
subject to runs and their value can change very quickly as we have seen in recent months.
Moreover, a firm accepting its own unbacked crypto asset as collateral for loans and
margin payments, as there are indications may have happened with FTX, creates extreme
‘wrong way’ risk – i.e. when the exposure to a counterparty increases together with the risk

1

‘CPSS-IOSCO Review of Standards for Payment, Clearing and Settlement Systems. (2010)’

Bank of England

Page 4

of the counterparty’s default2. Indeed, in the FTX case, there are indications that it could
have been a run on its crypto coin, FTT, which triggered the collapse.
Moreover protection of client funds is crucial. In many of these platforms the platform takes
possession of the cryptographic keys and manages transactions on the ledger for a pool of
assets. It is far from clear whether these practices deliver the assurance of either custody
of assets in the conventional finance world or of a claim on the balance sheet in the way
that occurs with accounts at a bank.
‘Crypto’ was born in unregulated space: indeed, part of the objectives of its early
developers was to create a financial system outside regulation. While not yet of systemic
scale, the crypto ecosystem has grown very rapidly in recent years and broadened to
encompass a range of financial services.
The experience of the past year has demonstrated that it is not a stable ecosystem. Part
of this is because, its foundation is completely unbacked instruments of extreme volatility
that can swing wildly in value. But part is also because the crypto institutions at the centre
of the much of the system exist in largely unregulated space and are very prone to the
risks that regulation in the conventional financial sector is designed to avoid. It is in part for
this reason that, since September, the FCA has warned publically on FTX that “this firm
may be providing financial services or products in the UK without our authorisation… you
are unlikely to get your money back if things go wrong”3.
Some, of course, would argue that the answer is not proper regulation of the risks in
centralised crypto platforms, like FTX, but rather the development of decentralised finance
in which functions like lending, trading, clearing etc. take place through software protocols
built on the permission-less blockchain. In such a world, it is effectively the ‘code’ that
manages the risks rather than intermediaries. And indeed, there is some tentative and
limited evidence that the failure of FTX has stimulated some transfer of activity to
decentralised platforms.
From the standpoint of a financial stability authority and a financial regulator, I have yet to
be convinced that the risks inherent in finance can be effectively managed in this way.
That scepticism is greater if the activity in question is the trading, lending, etc. of super
volatile assets without intrinsic value. The robustness and resilience of the permission less block chain has not been demonstrated at scale and over time. And some of the
protocols themselves may carry risks – for example automatic liquidation of volatile

2

The intuition here is generally quite familiar to people - you probably would think twice before buying fire
insurance from a company being run out of the house next door for example.
3 Information for FTX customers | FCA

Bank of England

Page 5

collateral, no matter how rapid, does not remove the need for liquidity providers to avoid
the amplification of fire sale dynamics.
Moreover, it is not clear the extent to which these platforms are truly decentralised. Behind
these protocols typically sit firms and stakeholders who derive revenue from their
operations. Moreover it is often unclear who, in practice, controls the governance of the
protocols.
More generally, as with driverless cars, they are only as good as the rules, programmes
and sensors which organise their operations. We would certainly need a great deal of
assurance before such systems could be deployed at scale in finance.
Against that background, the question – more pointed now, following the collapse of FTX is whether we should bring the financial service activities and the entities that now
populate the crypto world within the regulatory framework. And, if so, how?
My answer to the first question is that we should continue to bring these activities and
entities within regulation, for three reasons.
First, and most obviously, the need to protect consumers/investors. Whether or not one
thinks it is sensible to invest or trade in the highly speculative assets that make up most of
the activity in the crypto world, investors should be able to do so in transparent, fair and
robust marketplaces, with the protections that they would get in conventional finance.
There will probably always be some who prefer – for a variety of reasons – to invest and
trade in an unregulated, opaque world. But we should not push the majority who do not
want those risks into that world because there is no regulated alternative.
My second reason is the need to protect financial stability. While the crypto world, as was
demonstrated during last year’s crypto winter and last week’s FTX implosion is not at
present large enough or interconnected enough with mainstream finance to threaten the
stability of the financial system, its links with mainstream finance have been developing
rapidly.
We should not wait until it is large and connected to develop the regulatory frameworks
necessary to prevent a crypto shock that could have a much greater destabilising impact.
The experience in other areas of digitalisation has demonstrated the difficulty of retrofitting
regulation on new technologies and new business models after they have reached
systemic scale.
It is, of course, possible that neither of these two reasons - investor protection and
protection against financial stability risk - will be relevant because the very instability and
riskiness of the world of unregulated crypto finance, most recently demonstrated by FTX,
will in the end ensure that the sector cannot grow. Indeed, some have argued for

Bank of England

Page 6

regulators grappling with the crypto world to keep it outside the regulatory framework to
ensure that users’ ‘caveat emptor’ concerns prevents both growth and connection with
mainstream finance4.
And that leads to my third reason.
Forecasting the direction and pace of technological innovation is an even more uncertain
game than economic forecasting. Promising technologies fall by the wayside; unexpected
ones flourish. And technologies combine in ways that cannot be anticipated. But the
technologies that have been pioneered and refined in the crypto world, such as
tokenisation, encryption, distribution, atomic settlement and smart contracts, not only seem
unlikely to go away as our everyday lives become more ‘digital’, but may well have the
potential to improve efficiency, functionality and reduce risk in the financial system.
A potential example of this is the integration of functions in ‘smart contracts’ that I
mentioned earlier. A possible use case for such integration, which has been pioneered in
the defi world is the combining the functions of trading, clearing and settlement of
tokenised financial assets into a single, instantaneous contract, rather than being carried
out in sequence by three separate institutions over a number of day. This, if applied to
‘real world’ assets, like equities, could offer a substantial improvement in the efficiency of
financial market infrastructure and reduce risks by enabling instant settlement – T plus
now5.
There are of course risks in such integration as I mentioned earlier, whether it happens
organisationally or technologically. The Bank of England is working with the FCA and the
Treasury to set up a regulatory ‘sand box’ for developers to explore whether and how
those risks can be managed to the level of assurance we expect from the current system6
So my third reason for bringing the activities of the crypto world within the relevant
regulatory frameworks is to foster innovation. This may appear counter intuitive to those
who see regulation as opposed to innovation. But, as I have said before, ‘people do not fly
in unsafe aeroplanes’. Innovation may start in unregulated spaces. But it will only be
developed and adopted at scale within a framework that manages risks to existing
standards.

For an argument of this position see for example ‘Let Crypto Burn: Just say no to legitimacy-inferring
regulation’ – FT Alphaville (17.11.2022)
5 See the discussion of the potential risks and benefits in Cunliffe (2022): ‘Innovation in post trade services opportunities, risks and the role for the public sector’.
6 Financial Services and Markets Bill – Articles 21 and 22.
4

Bank of England

Page 7

And by holding innovative approaches, using technological advance, to the same
standards as existing approaches we can ensure that the benefits of new technology and
new business models actually flow form innovation rather than from regulatory arbitrage.
This in turn, determines the answer to the second question of ‘how’ regulation should be
extended to these areas. The guiding principle should be ‘same risk, same regulatory
outcome’. The starting point should be our existing regulatory frameworks – for
investment products, for exchanges, for payments systems and other financial functions –
and the level of assurance we require that the relevant risks have been managed.
Technological change and different business models may mean we have to find new ways
to deliver that assurance. We should be under no illusions that this will always be an easy
process. For example, as I have said, it remains for me a very uncertain question whether
use of the permission-less blockchain could deliver the necessary level of assurance for
activities that are integral to the stability of the financial system.
Our approach as regulators should be open -- by which I mean we should be prepared to
explore whether and if so how the necessary level of assurance – equal to that in
conventional finance - could be attained. But we should also be firm that where it cannot,
we are not prepared to see innovation at the cost of higher risk.
This is very much the approach we are looking to take in the UK for the extension of the
regulatory framework to the use of crypto technologies and business models in finance.
The Financial Services and Markets Bill, currently in Parliament addresses the regulation
of payment systems using “digital settlement assets” defined as “digital representations of
value” – in other words digital tokens representing money.
The objective is to extend the current Bank of England and FCA regulatory regimes for
e money and payment systems to cover the use ‘stablecoins’ for payments7.
The powers in the Bill will extend not only to the systems for transferring such coins
between parties to make payments, but to the issuance and storing of the coins. The Bank
will have responsibility for such payment systems which are systemic or likely to become
systemic. This will apply whether such systems exist to make payments for real things or
for crypto assets should the latter activity become systemic in scale.
We intend early next year to consult in detail the regulatory framework that will apply to
such systemic payment systems and the services, like wallets, that accompany them. In
doing so, we will be guided by the principle of ‘same risk, same regulatory outcome’ set
out above. In the case of stablecoins used as money to make payments, the regulatory
The Banking Act 2009 provides the statutory basis for the Bank’s oversight of payment systems. It allows
HM Treasury to recognise systems for supervision by the Bank of England as part of the Bank’s objective to
maintain UK financial stability.
7

Bank of England

Page 8

outcome has been expressed by the Financial Policy Committee of the Bank as an
expectation that stablecoins used in systemic payment chains should meet standards
equivalent to those expected of commercial bank money. And that's in terms of stability of
value, robustness of legal claim and the ability to redeem at par in fiat8.
Some of the likely foundational features of the regulatory regime on which we will consult
are already clear. The FPC made clear last year that to deliver that regulatory outcome
“regulatory safeguards will be needed for a non-bank systemic stablecoin to ensure that
the coin issuance is fully backed with high quality and liquid assets, alongside loss
absorbing capital as necessary, to compensate coinholders in the event that the stablecoin
fails”9. It also made clear that in the absence of deposit protection for coinholders, other
elements of the regime would need to be strengthened to deliver the necessary level of
assurance.
The consultation will set out in more detail how the coinholders’ claims on the stablecoin
issuer and wallets should be structured to deliver redemption at par in line with commercial
bank money, how the backing assets should need to be managed to ensure they are
always available to meet redemptions and, more generally the requirements for corporate
structure, governance, accountability and transparency necessary to meet the standards
we expect in other parts of the financial system that carry out the same functions. The
FTX example underlines how important these aspects are.
The legislation covers the use of crypto technologies for the payments function. The
Treasury intends to consult in the near future on extending the investor protection, market
integrity and other regulatory frameworks that cover the promotion and trading of financial
products to activities and entities involving crypto assets. At present, in the UK, it is, to a
large extent, only the anti-monetary laundering regulatory framework which applies to
these activities and entities.
Finally, let me turn to our work with the Treasury on central bank digital currency, or, to put
it more plainly on the issuance by the Bank of England of a digitally native pound sterling.
Our plan remains to issue a consultative report around the end of year setting out the next
steps that we propose.
Over the past few days, I have had a few comments both to the effect that the collapse of
FTX shows that we need to get on and issue a digitally native pound – and to the effect
that FTX shows that we do not need do so.

8
9

Bank of England Record of the Financial Policy Committee Meeting 13 December 2019.
Bank of England Record of the Financial Policy Committee Meeting 24 March 2022.

Bank of England

Page 9

My initial reaction to both points of view was that there really was no connection between
FTX and our work on a digitally native, general purpose form of Bank of England money,
for use by households and businesses in making payments.
But on reflection, I think I understand the comments better. FTX in particular and the
crypto ecosystem in general are emblematic of these new technologies and the possibility
that they might revolutionise financial services and the forms that money takes in our
economy.
For some perhaps the lesson is that tokenisation and digitalisation of finance should not
take place in unregulated space and, moreover, needs to be underpinned by a robust and
reliable of digital settlement asset. For others, the message is perhaps that the crypto
world and its technologies are a very long way from influencing, let alone changing, the
way financial services, including payments, are delivered at scale in the real world.
It is, as I said earlier, very difficult to predict which technologies will be successful and
when and how they might begin to change the way we do things. The bursting of the
dot.com bubble in the early years of this century did not herald the end of the development
of internet commerce though it took longer than its original enthusiasts imagined and
emerged in a very different form, dominated by big tech platforms.
Our work on a digitally native pound is driven by the trends we now see both specifically in
payments, including the reducing role of cash, and more generally in the increasing
digitalisation of daily life.
It is motivated by two primary concerns.
First, that in a world in which new, tokenised forms of money emerge, enabled by new
technology, we remain able to ensure that all forms of money that circulate in the UK are
robust, interchangeable without loss of value and denominated our unit of account – the
pound sterling. Physical cash plays a role in ensuring that, at present, all forms of
commercial bank money in the UK have to be redeemable in cash - Bank of England
money - on demand in cash and without loss of value. Given the trends away from
physical cash, which cannot be used in an increasingly digital economy, and, potentially,
towards new forms of tokenised money, a digital pound may be needed in future to fulfil
the same function.
Second, to ensure that there can be competition and innovation in the development of new
functionalities using tokenised money. Given the network externalities around money and
the likely cost of developing robust and risk managed tokenised money like stablecoins, it
is possible that the development of digital settlement assets will converge on a few large
players who will dominate and perhaps control innovation in payment services. We have
seen a similar dynamic in the emergence of large internet platforms and marketplaces. A

Bank of England

Page 10

digital pound would provide a digital settlement asset available to a wide variety of private
sector innovators and developers of payment services.
The first concern is primarily for central banks, charged with ensuring the stability of
money in the economy. The second is more of a concern for government. And of course
there are other motivations, such as financial inclusion and resilience.
I do not have the time to go into those in detail today, and, in any event, I do not wish to
pre-empt the report on the next steps for this work that we and the Treasury intend to
issue soon. But I do want to emphasise that this work, and any future decision to
introduce a digitally native pound should not be seen in the context of the status quo but
rather in the context how current trends in money, payments and technology might evolve.
And above all, in this, as in the work on regulation that I discussed earlier, our aim is to
ensure that innovation can take place but within a framework in which risks are properly
managed and which safeguards the sustainability of such innovation. The events of last
week provide a compelling demonstration of why that matters.
Thank you.
The views expressed here are not necessarily those of the Bank of England, the Monetary
Policy Committee or the Financial Policy Committee. I would like to thank Amy Lee,
Teresa Cascino, Emma Butterworth, Katie Fortune, Bernat Gual-Ricart, Jenny Khosla,
Grellan McGrath, Andrew Walters, Daniel Wright and Cormac Sullivan for their help in
preparing the text.

