Regulators, financial industry and the problem of
regulatory capture

Foreword by
Robert Jenkins, Member of the Financial Policy Committee, Bank of England

Published in Making Good Financial Regulation: Towards a Policy Response to
Regulatory Capture on 25 September 2012

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

Driven by hubris, greed and stupidity bankers led the charge off the cliff. But where were the regulators?
Why did they not see it coming? Why did they not prevent it? Why did they trust bankers to know what was
best for banking? In short, how could regulators have been so dumb as to believe that bankers were so
smart? This book supplies answers to these questions. It explores the ways in which regulators can
sometimes be captivated, co-opted and conned by those they regulate. Best of all, it suggests a number of
actionable policies to mitigate the problem.

Industry influence operates at all levels of the rule making ranks – from the peak of politics to the substrata of
supervision. It need not be unhealthy. Indeed, interaction between regulators and the regulated is natural
and normal. Yes, industry seeks to shape the rules under which it will operate. But rule-makers need industry
input in order to craft sensible policy. Some degree of influence is therefore inevitable. Unfortunately, there
are times and industries where special interest groups are able to bring disproportionate influence to bear – a
condition called “regulatory capture.” The financial sector is one such industry and the run-up to the crisis
one such time. The obvious question which arises: is such influence still excessive and thus unduly shaping
the needed regulatory response?

My first encounter with “capture” came at a moment of meltdown in 2008. At the time I chaired both a
London-based investment firm and the trade association representing the UK investment industry. As
financial panic spread I watched in disbelief as bankers trooped through the doors of Downing Street to
advise Government on how best to address a problem which bankers themselves had largely created. Far
from being discredited, the guidance of these “experts” was eagerly sought – and with virtually no
counterbalancing input from other stakeholder groups. Over the succeeding months officials went on to tap a
more appropriate range of expertise. But at that key moment in time - capture was complete.

“Political capture” can be fueled by campaign contributions but in the case above, it resulted from the
pervasive beliefs of the day. The theology of the time maintained that: markets were efficient and would
provide the necessary discipline to participants; the financial sector could be left largely to police itself; global
banking and their host centers were engaged in fierce global competition; regulation should facilitate that
competition and not get in its way; and therefore, when it came to regulation, less was more. This set of
beliefs permeated the body politic, shaped the regulatory approach of “light touch” and, believe it or not,
established a mindset amongst some supervisors that the regulated banks were to be seen as “clients.” The
technical term here is “cognitive or intellectual” capture. The non-technical term is brainwashed.

Four years on, one might imagine that bankers’ ability to bewitch and bamboozle would have ebbed. Alas
not. Their formidable lobby has led and continues to lead an effective campaign to persuade pundits, public
and politicians that calls for higher capital requirements are impeding the economic recovery. It is an
argument framed so as to force the gullible and well intentioned to choose between public safety and
economic growth. It is a false argument and a false choice. It ignores the facts - not the least of which is an
entire half century of post-war expansion during which bankers operated profitably at lower levels of
2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

2

leverage. That such myths find favour with otherwise intelligent commentators shows that intellectual capture
is alive and well. Other stakeholders in financial stability - such as the investment industry, should speak up
to help counter the sway of the spurious but seductive. Indeed, a proposal to mobilize better the competing
interests in the regulatory debate is one of the author’s principal recommendations.

This book is not a polemic. It did not begin with a particular point of view followed by a search for supporting
facts. Its conclusions flow from a dispassionate review of the question. The objective of the author, as indeed
that of its sponsoring publisher, is the making of better regulation. What therefore, could be more timely than
an analysis of a key impediment to effective rule making and supervision?

The work contains a series of thoughtful reflections on the topic of capture in the regulation of the financial
sector. It examines the issue through the eyes of both the regulator and regulated. It taps perspectives of
both the practitioner and the academic. And it takes a useful look at other highly regulated but non-financial
industries in a quest for relevant lessons and solutions. Finally, the book proposes a series of specific policy
responses designed to combat the worst aspects of capture. The recommendations in this volume are
presented as actionable “low hanging fruit” – which they are, provided excessive industry influence does not
prevent their adoption.

Robert Jenkins is a practitioner, regulator and academic. He is an external member of the Financial Policy
Committee of the Bank of England and Adjunct Professor, Finance at London Business School. Prior to his
appointment to the BoE, Mr. Jenkins spent 16 years running bank trading rooms followed by 18 years
managing investment management businesses. From 2007 to 2009 he chaired the Investment Management
Association, UK.

3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

3

