Remarks on challenges to the economic outlook
Remarks given by
Jonathan Haskel, External Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England, and
Imperial College Business School, Imperial College, London

CEPR / Chicago Booth Webinar: Panel remarks on the economic challenges facing the new
U.S. Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen

5 March 2021

My thanks to Jamie Lenney and Marilyne Tolle for their assistance in preparation for this event. I would also like
to thank Becky Maule, Nick McLaren, Tom Smith and Silvana Tenreyro for their comments. Errors and opinions
are my own.
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

It is a pleasure to sit with this panel today to discuss some of the upcoming economic challenges for the new
US Treasury Secretary. In my brief remarks, I will offer a UK perspective and reflect upon some of the issues the
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) at the Bank of England has been considering for the UK outlook.
To begin with, let me consider the below Figure 1 which plots real GDP for the financial crisis and during the
current pandemic, including our forecasts.

Figure 1: The UK Recovery

Pre-Crisis

Financial Crisis

Post-Crisis

COVID-19+

2021-2022+

2023+

GDP

2.6

-4.8

1.8

-9.7

8.5

1.2

Productivity++

1.8

-1.9

0.6

-2.3

2.1

0.5

Growth Rates (pp)

Source: ONS, Bank of England and author calculations.
Note: Profiles of recoveries are indexed to the level of output in the quarter before the recession. The dashed blue line is the forecast in
the January 2020 MPR, the dark solid blue line the forecast in the February 2021 MPR. Scarring assumptions explain the majority of
the difference between the two forecasts by quarter 16. The table shows average annualised growth rates for 2001Q1-2008Q1,
2008Q2-2009Q2, 2009Q3-2019Q4, 2019Q4-2021Q1, 2021Q2-2022Q4 and 2023. + Denotes the forecast from February 2021 MPR. ++
Productivity is GDP divided by aggregate hours worked.

This figure illustrates that:
1) In 2020 the UK experienced an extraordinary economic contraction. In fact it was the largest annual
contraction in economic output recorded since 1709. The economic historians among you will know this
as the Great Frost (the coldest European Winter for 500 years).
2) Today, in the midst of a third national lockdown, we are still a long way from our pre-recession trend line
and a ways off where we were at the equivalent point of the financial crisis.
3) We expect a strong recovery (from a low base), and to ultimately fare better in this recovery than we did
after the financial crisis: returning more quickly and closer to the pre-crisis trend.

2

4) We expect to return to pre-pandemic growth rates but will not make up for lost time and thus, at least in
the medium term, the level of economic output is permanently lower or ‘scarred’1.
The proximate challenge is to prevent (1) and (2) from jeopardising (3), and to minimise (4).
The challenges
Scarring
Let me first consider the potential for economic ‘scarring’. In its best collective view the MPC has forecast that
some persistent effects of the pandemic will weigh on the supply capacity of the UK economy, to the extent that
the level of potential GDP (𝑌 ∗ ) is around 1¾ percent lower by the end of 2023 than it otherwise would have
been. Why is this? To help us think about this let us consider a formula2 for the level of potential GDP 𝑌 ∗ :
𝑌∗ = (

𝑌∗
𝐾∗ ∗
∗
∗
)
𝐻
=
𝑓
(𝐴
,
)𝐻
𝐻∗
𝐻∗
𝑌∗

This formula tells us that potential GDP is composed of potential per-hour productivity ( ∗) and potential labour
𝐻

supply 𝐻 ∗ . Potential productivity is a function of general technical progress 𝐴∗ and capital services 𝐾 ∗ relative to
𝐻 ∗ . In other words, labour productivity growth is underpinned by investment in capital that makes workers more
efficient as well as general improvements in workers’ efficiency (𝐴∗ ) that arise from a variety of sources,
including individual experience on the job and process innovations.3 The pandemic has and will continue to
disrupt both of these channels.
Figure 2: The recovery of consumption and investment

Sources: ONS and Bank of England.
Note: Volume measures of consumption and investment indexed to 2019Q4. Profiles shown by the dotted lines to 2023Q4 should be viewed
as broadly consistent with the MPC’s projections for GDP, CPI inflation and unemployment (as presented in the fan charts) in the February
2021 MPR.

Note that we are talking here about scarring in terms of levels, as we expect to return to productivity growth rates of around ½% per
annum, similar to the rates of growth observed before the pandemic. This is much lower than the productivity growth we sustained before
the financial crisis, which was close to 2 percent.
2
This formula is typical of the formulae that sit within macroeconomic models of the business cycle.
3
We are here relegating improvements in human capital to A.
3
1

Lower 𝑲∗ : Starting with tangible capital, overall investment in capital goods collapsed in 2020 and failed to
recover to the same extent as we saw for consumption (Figure 2). Looking forward, residual uncertainty and
risk aversion over the recovery are likely to continue to weigh on investment, as they have in past recoveries
(Cominetti et al, 2021). Therefore, we expect workers will be operating with less capital than they otherwise
would.
Lower 𝑨∗ : In terms of intangible capital, reduced levels of investment in research and development and process
improvements will drag on overall levels of efficiency in the medium term. In terms of human capital, we also
anticipate that time out of the labour force through the government’s furlough scheme (Coronavirus Job
Retention Scheme) in 2020 and 2021, and higher unemployment in 2021 and 2022, will reduce the
accumulation of human capital through less ‘learning by doing’.
Lower 𝑯∗ : Elevated levels of unemployment can also lower the supply capacity of the economy.
Unemployment in our forecast peaks at 7¾ percent in the middle of 2021 and then comes down. However, if
that unemployment translates into higher structural unemployment, then one can have a high-unemployment
economy but with lower potential supply. This will especially be the case when there is a substantial mismatch
between the characteristics of unemployed workers and posted vacancies, for example a regional or industry
mismatch or differences in required skills and experience. This was significant after the financial crisis
(Sahin et al, 2014).4 We have made no specific assumptions about the underlying causes of any labour market
mismatch over the forecast but lasting changes to the way we work and consume are possible candidates,
alongside broader forces of creative destruction that might accelerate in a recovery. While this labour mismatch
effect is likely to be temporary, we currently expect it to persist into the medium term.
There are other channels, not incorporated in our forecast, that might also affect potential output.The first is the
prospect of more significant structural change from increased working from home and shifts in the compositon
of consumption. I’ll make two brief points on this. The first is that while it is remarkable that in recent months
(according to the ONS BICS survey) almost 50 percent of the UK’s active labour force was working from home,
a net balance of firms across the vast majority of industries does not intend to use increased homeworking as a
permanent feature going forward, nor do they think homeworking has improved productivity. This is illustrated in
Figure 3, which captures these two points. First, as the y axis shows, there is only one industry where firms
intend to increase homeworking permanently, Information and Communication, with all the other industries
stating they do not intend to do so (Financial services are not surveyed). Second, there is a positive correlation,
captured by the trend line, between the intent of permanent homeworking on the y axis and experiences of
homeworking productivity on the x axis. All industries are in the bottom-left quadrant, with only Information &
Communication in the top-right. This suggests, to me at least, it is likely that the majority of industries will return
to the workplace when the pandemic restrictions are lifted, lessening the impact of structural change from this
quarter.

4

See the August 2020 MPR for more discussion on this.
4

Figure 3: Working from home prospects

Net percentage expecting increased homeworking as permanent (y axis) vs net percentage reporting increased
productivity from homeworking (x axis)

Source: Business Impacts of Coronavirus (COVID-19) Survey data. Average of waves 14 (21 September -4 October 2020), 16 (5-18
October 2020), 18 (16-29 November 2020), 20 (14-23 December 2020), 22 (11-24 January 2021) and 24 (25 January -7 February 2021).
Note that “Other Services” has been removed from the sample.
Questions: “How has the increase in homeworking affected the productivity of your workforce?” and “Does your business intend to use
increased homeworking as a permanent business model going forward?”

The second point is the importance of putting any potential structural change in a longer-run context. People
often discuss structural change in the context of the massive changes in manufacturing employment. To get
some measure of this, Figure 4 illustrates the significant shift away from employment in manufacturing in the
UK since 1980, captured by the fall in the manufacturing industry’s share of employment. I also plot the share of
employment in Accommodation and Food services, the sector that has been most affected by COVID-19
restrictions. In the 15 years from 1980-1995 the maunfacturing share fell from around 25% to 15%, and in the
following 15 years from 15% to 8%. Over that entire period Accommodation and Food hovered around 5%.
Note that even under these extreme circumstances, the change in the share of aggregate hours in this industry
in 2020 is actually small relative to the longer-run shift in manufacturing. Putting this together the prospects for
large COVID-specific structural employment changes are probably small, at least in an economic sense.

5

Figure 4: Industry employment shares

Source: ONS
Note: Dashed lines are shares of total employment (jobs). Solid lines are hours shares of total hours
worked from the Labour Force Survey. Last datapoint in 2020Q3.

Another unincorporated channel is the prospect of lower future levels of intangible investment, an important
driver of economic growth. I (Haskel, 2019) and others (Garcia-Macia, 2017) have discussed the
post-financial-crisis slowdown in intangible investment. The hurdle for intangible investment is that it can be
difficult to fund as the assets it generates are less easy to pledge as collateral and possibly riskier. For example
significant spillovers may mean the benefits of the intangible investment accrue to third parties. A strong
intangible economy therefore requires a financial system capable of lending against intangibles assets. Here is
an area where we should expect to fare better this time round, as the financial system is in a much stronger
position today than it was after the financial crisis5. An additional factor is that house prices have not decreased
as they did during the financial crisis. In fact they grew by 8.5% in the UK over 2020, on the back of the stamp
duty holiday and supportive fiscal and monetary policy. This might matter for investment that relies on private
real estate as collateral, as shown in studies such as Bahaj et al (2020) and noted in a speech (Haskel, 2020) I
made last year that highlighted the particular importance of this channel for intangible investment.
Reduced entry of innovative firms may also drag on growth over the medium term if a subdued economic
environment deters them or new firms struggle to obtain finance. Again, a relatively stronger financial system
should help mitigate some of this risk. So far I’ve yet to see material evidence of any decline – to the contrary,

5

See December 2020 Financial Stability Report.
6

Figure 5 shows we have actually seen a surprisingly large uptick in new registrations, which requires more
analysis.

Figure 5: New business registrations in the UK

Source: Companies House register. Note: Last data point is December 2020.

A final point on scarring is to note that we have not talked about scarring in terms of growth rates, nor do we
forecast a lower rate of productivity growth beyond the medium term. This is in stark contrast to the slowdown
witnessed after the financial crisis, where the average annual productivity growth rate in the UK fell from close to
2 percent to about ½ percent (Figure 1) – the unresolved ‘productivity puzzle’. Had we reverted to the pre-crisis
trajectory of productivity growth after the financial crisis, the level of GDP in 2019 would have been about 13
percent higher than it was. Our forecasts are that productivity is set to grow still very slowly, at about ½% pa.
In that sense, the growth scarring from the financial crisis is still with us.
Fiscal drawdown
Rightly, governments around the world have stepped in to provide insurance against the economic impact of the
pandemic. The cost of announced coronavirus-related policy measures alone is expected to be around
16 percent of GDP, of which about ½ has been spending on employment and business support, such as the
furlough scheme, tax relief and government-guaranteed loans6. While the expiration of these measures is a
moving target, we can expect them to be withdrawn once restrictions loosen sufficiently. In the Spring Budget
delivered on 3 March, the government announced an extension to the support measures for jobs and
businesses until the autumn. The transition away from government support represents a considerable test for
the recovery. Figure 6 below highlights how these support schemes have insulated employees and businesses.
On the left hand side we see, remarkably, that unlike during the financial crisis, insolvencies actually fell over
2020. This is in large part due to capacity constraints on administrators and courts caused by the pandemic,
such that we can expect a level of pent-up insolvencies to emerge. However, the business support schemes will

See the Office of Budget Responsibility March 2021 outlook for more detail. Quoted numbers are from chapter 3 (Chart A) and are
expressed relative to 2020 GDP.
7
6

also have played a part in this as well, by reducing cash-flow pressures on firms and banning commercial tenant
evictions.

On the right hand side of Figure 6, we see that, remarkably, despite the significant difference in magnitude of
the economic contractions, the change in the official unemployment rate over 2020 follows a similar trajectory to
what we saw during the financial crisis. The government’s furlough scheme explains7 this of course and the
latest data from the ONS would suggest that 25% of the private-sector labour force is currently on furlough.
Cominetti et al (2021) estimate that of these furloughed workers, half a million have been on furlough for at least
six months. The extent to which these schemes have averted rather than simply delayed rising insolvencies and
unemployment remains, for me, an open question.
Figure 6: Insolvencies and unemployment
Panel A: Insolvencies

Panel B: Unemployment rate

Source: UK Government Insolvency Service, ONS and author calculations.
Note: Insolvencies and unemployment are plotted relative to the quarter containing the pre-recession peak in GDP.

Vaccine efficacy vs vaccine effectiveness and escape mutants
A final challenge or concern is the distinction between vaccine efficacy and vaccine effectiveness (sometimes
called implementation). Vaccine efficacy, that is, how well the vaccine works in a laboratory setting on screened
participants, is very high – a tribute to the scientific community. Less is known about vaccine effectiveness, that
is, how well the vaccine works in the field, which depends also on production, logistics and public health
policies. The vaccine manufacturing and distribution processes would seem to be vulnerable to small
disturbances at any point along the production and distribution chains (a sort of “O Ring” effect). Another issue
is the emergence of highly transmissible variants of the virus, so-called “escape mutants”, of the kind that
necessitated a re-imposition of lockdowns here and abroad earlier this year. The time needed to redesign and

There are also some measurement issues related to the ONS’s labour force survey that mean the official unemployment rate has likely
struggled to capture the true increase in unemployment. More detail here.
8
7

redistribute vaccines that can deal with novel resistant strains could mean renewed restrictions and voluntary
social distancing as health risks worsened.
On the upside
I’ve largely focused so far on scarring and downside risks to the outlook but there are reasons to look to the
upside as well.
First, the early evidence suggests vaccine efficacy is translating into vaccine effectiveness. Across the
United Kingdom, more than 20 million8 people have received a first dose of a vaccine, including nearly all of the
most vulnerable groups in society. We are also beginning to see evidence of vaccine effectiveness. For example
data from Public Health England shows one dose of the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine reduces the risk of infection by
more than 70 percent, rising to 85 percent after the second dose. They also report that those over 80 who
develop a COVID-19 infection after vaccination are around 40% less likely to be hospitalised than someone with
infection who has not been vaccinated. This is very promising but the true test will come when the majority of
the country begins the process of easing restrictions next week (8 March).
Another potential upside is a stronger recovery in consumer spending, if households (on the back of an effective
vaccine programme) choose to spend the savings involuntarily accumulated during the lockdowns (Figure 7).
Approximately £125bn of extra savings accumulated between March and November 2020 as consumption fell
due to COVID-related restrictions, while incomes were supported by government employment schemes. Due to
continued support and restrictions, this stock is set to rise even further and could approach £300bn by the time
restrictions are fully lifted. To put this into perspective, given there are approximately 30 million households in
the UK, that £300bn translates into an additional £10,000 of savings per household on average (were the
savings to be distributed equally – we comment on this below). That is a sizeable amount, equivalent to about
what the median UK household holds in liquid saving accounts/cash ISAs9.
The MPC’s central projection is for households to spend about 5% of these additional accumulated savings over
the forecast but it is conceivable households might choose to spend even more, particularly since a large
proportion of the accumulated savings is in liquid bank deposits, which can be spent easily. Pushing against that
is the fact that household consumption changes out of additional wealth are not generally measured to be all
that large, and the bulk of these savings will have accrued to wealthier households who are less likely to
respond to this extra private wealth through higher consumption10. We also asked households11 who had
accumulated extra savings – which constituted 30% of households – what they intend to do with these extra
savings in the 2020H2 NMG survey. Only a minority of those who had accumulated extra savings indicated they
would use those savings to finance high spending, whereas around 70 percent responded they would save it in
the bank (Figure 8).

At the time of writing, the figure was 21.3 million.
Based on calculations from the ONS’s wealth and asset survey (2016 year).
10
See February MPR section 3 and Vlieghe (2021) for more discussion.
11
Much more detailed information, in particular about the distribution of these additional savings, is set out here: How has Covid affected
household savings? | Bank of England
9
8
9

Figure 7: Household savings

Source: ONS. Note: Last data point is 2020Q3.

Figure 8: Household plans from extra savings

Sources: 2020H2 NMG Household Survey and Bank calculations.
Note: Distribution of answers to the question “You said your savings have increased during the pandemic. What do you plan to do with
these savings?”. “Other” includes giving to family/gift, not sure and prefer not to say.

Where does this leave me on monetary policy?
The economy has some significant challenges to overcome on our road to recovery.

At the February 2021 MPC meeting, I judged alongside my colleagues that the existing stance of monetary
policy remained appropriate, with the positive news related to the vaccine rollout offset by the near-term
deterioration of the public-health outlook and stringent lockdown measures. The decision to leave policy
unchanged was consistent with our guidance not to tighten monetary policy at least until there was clear
evidence that significant progress was being made in eliminating spare capacity and achieving the 2% inflation
target sustainably.
10

My views on the supply outlook are balanced. While I see potential for greater scarring should the economy fail
to overcome its near-term challenges, I don’t draw significant parallels, at this time, between the risk to supply
over the medium term and our experience after the 1980s recession and the financial crisis. The key issue after
the financial crisis was a severe and unexplained permanent slowdown in productivity growth that we were
grappling with before the pandemic.
The current MPR forecast shows the UK economy moving into a temporary period of excess demand in 2022.
Nevertheless, given the endogenous nature of supply and the temporary factors underpinning that movement
into excess demand, namely fiscal spending on health and some pent-up demand, I see relatively little risk of
sustained above-target inflation over this period.
Finally, it is my view that risks to activity remain skewed to the downside. As I have consistently argued,12
risk-management considerations dictate that policy should lean strongly against downside risks to the outlook13
and I remain open to the possibility that the economy might need further support to return inflation to the target
sustainably. This means guarding against any weakness in the economy being amplified by a tightening in
monetary conditions that could slow the return of inflation to the target. It also means being ready to deploy, as
and when needed, all the tools available to the MPC. That is why, following the completion of the PRA’s initial
consultation with regulated firms regarding the setting of zero or negative Bank Rate, I supported the decision
alongside my colleagues to request that the PRA further engage with firms to ensure they start preparations to
be ready to implement a negative Bank Rate at any point after six months. It is prudent for banks to start
preparations regardless of the currently desired policy stance, for that is what it means for a negative Bank Rate
to be in the MPC’s monetary policy toolkit.

Haskel (2019).
A risk-management approach proposes that the possibility of running out of monetary headroom warrants looser monetary policy in
advance of it occurring. See Evans et al (2015) and Adam and Billi (2007).
12
13

11

References
Adam, K. and Billi, R. M. (2007). Discretionary monetary policy and the zero lower bound on nominal interest
rates. Journal of Monetary Economics, Elsevier, vol. 54(3), pages 728-752, April.
Bahaj, S., Foulis, A., & Pinter, G. (2020). Home values and firm behavior. American Economic Review, 110(7),
2225-70.
Bank of England (2020). Monetary Policy Report, January 2020.
Bank of England (2020). Monetary Policy Report, August 2020.
Bank of England (2020). Financial Stability Report, December 2020.
Bank of England (2021). Monetary Policy Report, February 2021.
Cominetti, N., Leslie, J. & Smith, J. (2021). On firm ground? The impact of Covid-19 on firms and what policy
makers should do in response. Resolution Foundation, February 2021.
Cominetti, N., Henehan, K., Slaughter, H & Thwaites, G. (2021). Long Covid in the labour market: The
impact on the labour market of Covid-19 a year into the crisis, and how to secure a strong recovery. Resolution
Foundation, February 2021.
Evans, C., Fisher, J., Gourio, F. and Krane, S. (2015). Risk Management for Monetary Policy Near the Zero
Lower Bound. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Economic Studies Program. The Brookings Institution,
vol. 46(1) (Spring), pages 141-219.
Garcia-Macia, D. (2017). The financing of ideas and the great deviation. International Monetary Fund.
Haskel, J. (2019). Capitalism without capital: understanding our new "knowledge" economy. Speech given at
York University on 16 May 2019.
Haskel, J. (2019). An end-of-year retrospective on the UK outlook and monetary policy. Speech given at the
Resolution Foundation, London, on 20 December 2019.
Haskel, J. (2020). Monetary policy in the intangible economy - speech by Jonathan Haskel. Speech given at
University of Nottingham on 11 February 2020.
Office of Budget Responsibility. (2020). Economic and fiscal outlook. November.
Şahin, A., Song, J., Topa, G., & Violante, G. L. (2014). Mismatch unemployment. American Economic
Review, 104(11), 3529-64.
Vlieghe G. (2021). An update on the economic outlook. Speech given at Durham University on 22 February
2021.

12

