Remarks given by
Chris Salmon, Executive Director for Banking Services and Chief Cashier

At the launch of the public consultation for the Code of Conduct for the Authentication of
Machine-Dispensed Banknotes
25 February 2013

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Today, the Strategic Cash Group is launching a public consultation on a new industry policy for banknote
authentication. This is in response to a banknote recirculation model which has developed in recent years:
local recycling.

Local recycling occurs when a banknote tendered by one customer in, for example, a bank branch or shop is
then used to refill cash dispensing machines e.g. ATMs or self-service checkouts, and so then acquired by
another customer. This differs from using banknotes authenticated by wholesale cash centres to refill these
devices: a model which has provided robust authentication and quality control for banknotes for many years.

Local recycling has gained popularity abroad, particularly in Japan and parts of Europe. It has the potential to
be a useful supplement to the wholesale cash model in the UK, in some circumstances increasing efficiency
and flexibility. But without appropriate controls it could also reduce the extent to which banknotes are
authenticated.

Robust authentication underpins the public’s continued confidence in the currency: the public need to trust
that the banknotes they receive are genuine. This starts with the sophisticated security features which are
built into the banknotes themselves. But it also depends on these security features forming the basis for
authentication and handling practices throughout the cash cycle. Practices which the entire cash industry
need to work together on.

The Code of Conduct for the Authentication of Machine-Dispensed Banknotes will deliver robust local
recycling by addressing the change in how, where and by whom a banknote may be authenticated.

Many stakeholders already adopt good practice on this area. We now want to ensure that there are
adequate processes in place right across the industry to make sure counterfeits do not start to recirculate to
the public through ATMs and self-service checkouts, while also enabling the cash industry to benefit from the
potential efficiencies of local recycling.

There were just over 700,000 counterfeit Bank of England banknotes removed from circulation in 2012:
nearly all of them were £10s and £20s. While they account for only a fraction of one percent of all
Bank of England notes, we would like to work with you to reduce this.

The Bank of England employs a team which develops the most sophisticated banknote features. It also
analyses counterfeits and works with law enforcement agencies to bring counterfeiters to justice. And our
education team publicises the importance of checking multiple security features. But spreading good practice
is not something we can do single-handedly: we need the collaboration of all cash users.

2

All speeches are available online at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2

This collaboration is already well underway. The Code was drafted for SCG by a sub-group, which has
already sought considerable input from the cash industry. We are seeking to build on this through the
consultation process which starts today.

SCG’s aim is to put the Code in place later this year. It will be based on notes distributed via ATMs and
self-service checkouts being authenticated by machines which have been successfully tested by the
Bank of England.

I hope that many of you will respond to the consultation. With the Code in place, we will have a robust and
relevant policy for local recycling and a new pillar to support continuing confidence in our currency.

The consultation will run until 20 May 2013. A formal response will be published in July 2013, alongside the
final Code.

Notes to editors


The consultation document has been drafted by a sub-group of the Strategic Cash Group (SCG),
chaired by Victoria Cleland, the Bank of England’s Head of Notes Division and with consultation with
cash industry stakeholders. SCG is particularly grateful to the LINK Scheme Executive and the
British Retail Consortium for their input.



The Code consultation document can be found at:
http://www.paymentscouncil.org.uk/what_do_we_do/cash/cash_recycling_consultation/.



The consultation closes on 20 May 2013. A formal response will be published in July 2013, alongside
the final Code.



The Framework for the Testing of Automatic Banknote Handling Machines - the Bank introduced a
voluntary framework to test machines with known counterfeit types on a regular basis. The
Framework is one pillar of the Bank’s efforts to maintain a high level of confidence in Bank of
England banknotes. A full FAQ can be found at:
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/banknotes/Pages/retailers/framework.aspx.



The Code covers Customer-Operated Cash Dispensers (COCDs). Transactions where banknotes
are handed over by a person are not included. This is because where a member of the public
receives banknotes from another person at a till or branch counter, (s)he has the opportunity to
refuse the banknotes if (s)he is not confident that they are genuine. This is not possible where the
notes are machine dispensed. Moreover, it would be difficult for a member of the public to prove
whether a given suspect banknote came from a particular machine.



Based on the feedback from stakeholders, the sub-group developed the draft Code and decided
against recommending, at this stage at least, a legislative approach such as that enforced for the
euro. Further information on the ECB’s requirements can be found at:
http://www.ecb.int/euro/cashhand/recycling/html/index.en.html.



Seven banks in Scotland and Northern Ireland are currently authorised to issue banknotes on a
commercial basis. The banknotes issued by these banks are not covered by the current draft of the
Code but are expected to be included in a future version of the Code.

3

All speeches are available online at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

3



SCG is chaired by Chris Salmon, the Chief Cashier of the Bank of England. Secretariat support is
provided by UK Payments Administration on behalf of the Payments Council. The members of the
SCG are:

Bank of England
Barclays Bank plc
G4S Cash Solutions (UK) Ltd
HM Treasury
HSBC Bank plc
Lloyds Banking Group plc
National Australia Group
Nationwide Building Society
Payments Council
Post Office Ltd
The Royal Bank of Scotland plc
The Royal Mint Ltd
Santander Ltd
Vaultex UK Ltd
The aims of the SCG are:


Sustain reliable, available cash services, so that the public, retail and corporate customers are able
to withdraw and deposit notes and coin in the manner to which they are accustomed, and in the
manner which they might need;



To support issuers in maintaining the integrity of, and confidence in, their currency;



As far as possible, to ensure neutrality between surplus and deficit players

4

All speeches are available online at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

4

