Remarks on Covid-19 and Monetary Policy
Speech given by Professor Jonathan Haskel, External Member of the Monetary Policy
Committee

Brighton Chamber of Commerce (by Zoom)
1 July 2020

My thanks to Tom Belsham, Jamie Lenney, Elizabeth Levett, Matthew Swannell and Marilyne Tolle for their
comments and assistance in preparation for this event. Errors and opinions are my own.

Thank you for hosting me today, and in particular to Plus Accounting from Brighton for sponsoring this event. I
hope to be able to meet you all in person when circumstances permit.
Let me echo my MPC colleagues by saying that the current pandemic is first and foremost a health emergency
and express my deepest sympathies for all those who have suffered during the outbreak. And my gratitude to
the NHS health professionals, carers and volunteers who have been the front line of defence across the UK.
I shall make some remarks on the economic situation and the policy context. But I also want to hear about your
experiences to date and your thoughts on the challenges and opportunities as social distancing measures relax,
and we try to return to some semblance of normalcy.
Background
The UK is in the midst of an unprecedented economic shock. Due to covid-19 and associated social distancing
measures we expect a significant decline in output and rise in unemployment over the course of 2020
somewhere in line with the scenario we published in our May Monetary Policy Report1 (MPR), (see table 1). I
find one can only truly grasp the scale of this potential decline by comparing it to a long time series such that is
available from the Bank of England’s millennium dataset2. Figure 1 indicates 2020 could turn out to be the most
significant single-year decline in economic activity since 1706, larger than what we saw in the financial crisis a
decade ago or during the time of Spanish Flu and the return to the gold standard after World War I.
MPC policy to date
The Bank of England and the UK government have responded accordingly to such a significant shock. Since
the onset of the crisis, the MPC has cut Bank Rate from 0.75% to 0.1% and expanded our asset purchase
programme by £200bn in March and a further £100bn in June. The majority of the initial £200bn in purchases is
complete, and we expect to complete the remaining announced purchases by around the end of the year. The
first round of purchases aimed to prevent and stop in its tracks the financial market dysfunction resulting from
the significant financial market adjustment that occurred at the onset of this crisis in March 3. Figure 2 illustrates
that in the lead up to our announcement to expand asset purchases on 19 March, the UK government debt
market was showing significant signs of strain. This was apparent in falling and volatile prices (panel A) and
rising intermediation costs (panel B). These spikes we see in the panels, are highly unusual in what should be a
deep and calm market for safe UK government debt. But this was no normal time, with heightened uncertainty
creating a surge in the demand for cash (‘a dash for cash’). By stepping in and providing a reliably ample supply
of cash in the form of central bank reserves, the Bank of England was able to restore, almost immediately,
normal market functioning, as we can see in figure 2. This in turn helped the functioning of broader UK financial
markets and limited the potential amplification of the dramatic slowdown in economic activity we are
experiencing. However, as figure 3 shows, financial markets and conditions more broadly remain relatively
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/report/2020/monetary-policy-report-financial-stability-report-may-2020
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/statistics/research-datasets
3
For a more detailed commentary on these events, see Andrew Hauser’s speech (https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2020/andrewhauser-speech-hosted-by-bloomberg-via-webinar).
1
2

tight. This, combined with an uncertain economic forward path, and in my view, risks skewed to the downside
concerning employment and more medium-term economic adjustments, prompted my vote and approval of a
further expansion of asset purchases in June to guard against any unwarranted future tightening and help
support the economic recovery as social distancing measures come off.
I should point out, while QE and interest rate cuts grab headlines, in March we also revived our term funding
scheme to reinforce the pass-through of lower interest rates by temporarily allowing banks access to loans from
the Bank of England at close to Bank Rate. Given the membership of the Chamber is particularly concentrated
on small firms, this programme provides particularly strong incentives for banks to lend to SMEs. Finally, we are
working with the government to lend directly to firms through the Covid Corporate Financing Facility, which has
to date facilitated around £18bn in loans to (mostly larger) businesses.
Q2 so far
Since our initial policy decisions in March, we have been able to observe and digest the data for the UK
economy in Q2. Figure 4 shows the declines in output in aggregate (panel A) and by sector (panel B). The
overall fall in output in April was as dramatic as expected in our scenario and panel B shows us that the
accommodation and food sector almost completely shut down, with other sectors operating at about ½ the level
in April as they were in 2019.
Is there any good news? Figure 5 shows a glimmer of hope relative to our envisaged scenario, namely that
activity appears to be coming back faster than we anticipated. Retail sales and spending more broadly appear
to be recovering from their April lows, and we now expect Q2 as a whole will not be quite as negative as
expected. We’ve also seen a higher uptake of the government’s furlough schemes than we might have
anticipated with near enough 12 million claims for the schemes combined (figure 6, panel A). That is a
staggering number at around one third of the UK’s labour force. This higher uptake should for now be taken as a
positive sign relative to the counterfactual of mass unemployment as maintaining valuable employer-employee
matches will facilitate a smoother transition back to higher and more normal levels of economic activity. But we
should remember this past quarter is still likely to see by far the largest decline in output since quarterly national
accounts began. Worryingly the indicators of rising unemployment are already revealing themselves (figure 6,
panel B), with unemployment claims recorded to date enough to put us back to levels of unemployment not
seen since the financial crisis. Furthermore there remains a great deal of uncertainty as to how many of the
currently furloughed workers will be able to return to their jobs, which in large part will depend on our success as
a nation managing and suppressing the virus, and the state of household finances and consumers’ appetite for
resumption of discretionary economic activity.
Finally as an MPC member it would be remiss of me not to mention our target: CPI inflation. Figure 7 shows it
currently lies well below our target of 2%. The effects of the pandemic account for this in large part. The collapse
in global oil prices has had direct effects on inflation, via the prices of motor fuels and utilities (Panel B), and
indirect effects by reducing input costs in other sectors of the economy. The sharp drop in domestic activity is

also adding to downward pressure on inflation through increased spare capacity in most sectors of the economy
and supports our decision to maintain a historically loose monetary policy stance.
Working from home and Central Bank independence
I want to finish my remarks on two closely-related subjects, namely working from home and central-bank
independence.
Whilst the pandemic has caused hardship for many, I suspect there are at least some who, perhaps secretly, are
rather enjoying working from home. You can avoid the commute, distractions from co-workers and perhaps you
are enjoying social distancing from your boss. On the employer side, for firms whose workers can largely work
from home, I’m sure many are now asking themselves: what’s the point of paying sky-high rents simply in order
to be located next door to another firm who is paying sky-high rents?
Coming to work however does have quite a bit of value. First, you might well be learning a lot from your fellow
employees. On-the-job training is especially valuable for younger workers at the start of their careers.
Second, working from home exposes an employee to risk. Regardless of where you work, there are occasions
when, despite your best efforts, you cannot do your job as well as you would like through no fault of your own: a
supplier lets you down, the economy takes a nosedive and you cannot clinch that sale. Of course, you can go
to your employer and explain that it was not your fault. The problem arises if the employer cannot monitor your
performance. You call tell the employer you were trying as hard as you can, but you might have been down at
Brighton Beach for all they know.
Economic theorists are interested in what contracts look like when there is this “asymmetric information”
situation (you know if you were at the beach, the employer doesn’t).4 One way to get over this problem is to
simply accept the state of affairs and write a contract conditioned on performance with a whole series of clauses
to try to allow for events beyond the employee’s control. Most employees and employers, including I would
suspect, many in this Chamber, do not like complicated contracts. Even with the best intentions, they often turn
out to difficult to word and implement (incomplete in economist’s language). So in practice it’s inevitable that
without being able to monitor beach attendance, the employer will have, to some extent, to tie rewards to
employee performance. That exposes the employee to risk: sometimes they won’t get paid well, but for no fault
of their own.
The more attractive alternative is to dispense with a complicated contract. Here’s a much easier one. The
employee has to turn up at work. By requiring the employee to come into work the employer at least knows that
the employee is not watching widescreen TV or going down to the beach. That is to say, the requirement – to
turn up at work – is part of the contracting mechanism that enables employees and employers to get over the
difficulties of contracting under this condition of asymmetric information. And there’s a famous example of this.
A summary is to be found in, for example, the work of Oliver Hart and Bengt Holmström (https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/economicsciences/2016/press-release/).
4

The Silicon Valley CEO, Marissa Mayer, started her tenure as CEO of Yahoo! in 2013 by banning working from
home, requiring employees to come into work or quit the company.
What then happens when employees can’t come to work? It makes this kind of contracting more difficult. So
what are the outcomes? The implications for the macroeconomy are still to be fully worked out, but one can
immediately speculate on three. First, the class of contracts that employees have to accept might get more
risky, which in turn may increase risk-averse behaviour among employees. That increased caution would hold
spending down on many of the activities that your businesses are involved in, and lower aggregate demand.
Second, there is going to be even more intense sorting of workers into those who can and cannot perform
without supervision. Expect the returns to experience and soft skills, such as trust and reliability, to rise and,
perhaps prospects for young workers, who have not established such a reputation, to worsen. If that puts
downward pressure on wages, this will test the flexibility of the labour market and perhaps widen this dimension
of inequality.
The third is that in order to cope with all of this, firms are going to have to invest in new business processes 5.
Expect then a sustained period of low measured productivity, as firms have to spend more resources revising
their business processes. More speculatively, the returns to buildings might fall, as firms move away from
specific geographical locations, but the returns to a well-managed business will rise as firms put in place new
organisational design for their employees. Future economic policy will in large part depend on the extent of this
required adjustment (i.e. how different the economy will ultimately look post Covid-19) and the challenge for us
as policymakers will be to forecast this and set policy accordingly.
Let me finish by turning from the contract between employers and employees to the (perhaps implicit) contract
between the state and the public. Here the relationship at hand is between a public trying to predict what public
authorities will do about monetary policy. Politicians of all colours always face the temptation to “run the
economy hot” as an election nears. If the public can work this out, then inflation expectations can become
de-anchored which sets off a wage-price spiral that benefits nobody. What can improve upon this situation?
The answer from contract theory is to change the terms of the contract, in this case to delegate the setting of
monetary policy to an independent body, such as the central bank, as a commitment not to overheat the
economy. And indeed in crisis periods, the value of that commitment is all the more important, since citizens
want clarity and commitment as they navigate their way through uncertain times. This is why the recent
discussion around Central Bank independence and quantitative easing is important. I want to join my colleagues
on the MPC in saying a few words about why quantitative easing (QE) is not a threat to central bank
independence.

According to the ONS the UK spent £26bn on organisational capital and £29bn on training in 2016, about 2.8% of GDP combined. It is also
important to point out that these significant investments do not currently make it into our estimates of GDP.
https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/economicoutputandproductivity/productivitymeasures/articles/experimentalestimatesofinvestmentinintangib
leassetsintheuk2015/2016
5

As a reminder QE is the large-scale purchase of UK government debt 6 on secondary markets by the Bank of
England. As discussed, the Bank of England has engaged in QE in response to Covid-19, and in recent history,
after the Brexit vote (2016) and after the financial crisis (2009-2012). The mere coincidence of quantitative
easing and a large-scale increase in the issuance of government debt is consistent with the fact that a very
large negative shock has hit the economy. When such a shock hits the economy, an independent central bank
will under most conditions, make monetary policy more accommodative. It does so to reduce borrowing costs
and help expand economic activity in order to push inflation back to target. That reduction of borrowing costs
applies to all borrowers including the government7. When there is a severe negative shock, the government –
through the automatic stabilisers and discretionary interventions – will borrow more money. This is in line with
widely accepted economic theory, which says that governments should try to smooth out shocks to the
economy. Thus the accommodative monetary policy, which central banks correctly are employing, eases credit
conditions both private and public. This can create the appearance of purchases of government debt ‘propping
up the government’. As a number of my colleagues have pointed out8, the critical issue is the objective not the
accounting. The central bank is undertaking this easing in order to hit its target. Were we in danger of
overshooting the target, the central bank would reverse its monetary policy stance and do what is necessary to
return inflation to target. Thus the observation of large-scale central bank purchases and government issuance
is not evidence of the erosion of Central Bank independence.
The policy outlook
At our last policy meeting, I readily joined the majority of colleagues on the MPC in voting for more QE to avoid
a tightening of financial conditions which could have jeopardised hitting our inflation target. In thinking about our
prospects some commentators have raised the question of what the Bank should do if there were a second
wave of the pandemic. The answer, I would suggest, is that a second wave would be a statement about public
health and the Bank’s job would be to respond to the prospective economic consequences of this. Those
consequences would depend on a number of factors, including the reaction of the fiscal authorities and on
whether other countries are facing similar difficulties for example. It is also the case that cautious behaviour by
consumers is already built into our published scenario and we have demonstrated that we can respond quickly
and effectively to financial market dysfunction. In conclusion, I believe the current stance of monetary policy is
appropriate but, on balance, risks are to the downside.
Thank you for your kind attention and I’d be delighted to hear about your experiences in these difficult times
and, if I can, answer any questions.

For the most part. As part of these asset purchase programmes we have also announced the purchase of investment-grade corporate bonds.
£10bn was announced and purchased from 2016 and a further £10bn from March 2020.
7
See my colleague Silvana Tenreyro’s comments at the LSE public event podcast “COVID-19: the economic policy response” (18 May 2020)
8
See my colleague Gertjan Vlieghe’s speech (https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2020/gertjan-vlieghe-speech-monetary-policy-andthe-boes-balance-sheet) and my colleague Michael Saunders’ speech (https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2020/speech-by-michaelsaunders-28-may-2020).
6

Tables and figures
Table 1
1998-2007(a)

2008

2009

2010-18

2019

2020

UK GDP(b)

3

0

-4

2

1

-14

LFS Unemployment rate

5

6

8

6

4

8

CPI Inflation(c)

1.6

3.6

2.2

2.3

1.8

0.6

5.1

4.7

0.6

0.5

0.8

0.2

Bank

Rate(d)

Sources: Bank of England, ONS and Bank calculations.
Note: The profiles in this table should be viewed as broadly consistent with the illustrative scenario for GDP, CPI inflation and unemployment
(a) Averages over the period. (b) Excludes the backcast for GDP. (c) Annual average inflation rate. (d) Average Bank Rate (data) or implied
Bank Rate indicated by overnight index swaps (forecast).

Figure 1

Sources: “A millennium of macroeconomic data for the UK”, Bank of England. Author calculations.
Note: (a) Real UK GDP at market prices, geographically-consistent estimate based on post-1922 borders. £mn, Chained Volume measure,
2013 prices. From 2016 onwards it grows in line with MPC May 2020 MPR scenario. (b) Annual growth (%). (c) MPR scenario.

Figure 2
Panel A: Spot yields on UK gilts(a)

Panel B: Bid-offer spreads on UK gilts

Sources: (Panel A) Bloomberg Finance L.P. TradeWeb and Bank calculations. (Panel B) Eikon from Refinitiv and Bank calculations.
Note: (a) Zero‑coupon spot rates derived from government bond prices.

Figure 3

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., Eikon from Refinitiv, ICE/BoAML Global Research and Bank calculations.
Note: The UK Monetary and Financial Conditions Index (MFCI) summarises information from the following series: short-term and long-term
interest rates, the sterling ERI, corporate bond spreads, equity prices, and household and corporate bank lending spreads. The series
weights are based on the estimated impact of each variable on UK GDP. The chart shows changes in the MFCI from the average level over
the 15 working days to 22 January 2020. An increase in the MFCI signals tighter financial conditions and a decrease signals looser
conditions. For more information, see the Bank Overground post ‘How can we measure UK financial conditions?’.

Figure 4
Panel A: Monthly GDP

Panel B: Industry GDP

Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
Note: Charts shows declines in output between the average level in 2019 Q4 and April 2020. M20 Q2 is the level implied in the scenario laid
out in the May MPR.

Figure 5
Panel A: Retail sales

Panel B: CHAPS payments

Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
Note: CHAPS data is based on a sample of around 100 UK companies payments received from their merchant acquirers on a daily basis.
These payments reflect the sales that companies make through debit and credit card purchases, which are summed to estimate rolling sevenday revenues. Social consumption includes corporate revenues from hotels, restaurants, air travel and cultural events. Delayable consumption
includes household goods, clothing, vehicle purchases and recreational goods. Work related includes travel and fuel. Staples include housing,
food and health. Spending data shown through 24 June.

Figure 6
Panel A: Furlough scheme claims

Panel B: Claimant count

Sources: ONS and HMRC.
Note: The experimental Claimant Count consists of claimants of Jobseekers Allowance (JSA) and some Universal Credit (UC) Claimants. The
UC claimants that are included are 1) those that were recorded as not in employment and those claimants of Universal Credit who are required
to search for work, i.e. within the Searching for Work conditionality regime as defined by the Department for Work & Pensions (from April 2015
onwards). There were more than 34 million economically active individuals in the UK estimated in the most recent ONS labour market
summary, covering the three-month period February 2020 to April 2020.

Figure 7
Panel A: CPI Inflation

Panel B: Decomposition of changes in CPI

Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
Note: FNAB stands for food and non-alcoholic beverages. Core inflation is a measure of inflations that removes food, energy, alcohol and
tobacco goods from the basket of prices measured.

