Report on the ESRC – Oxford Martin School International Macro
Symposium, Oxford University, 1-2 October 2012

Summary of remarks made at the Symposium by
Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor Financial Stability, Bank of England

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

Paul Tucker (Deputy Governor, Bank of England) observed that, alongside bankers themselves, economists
had got much of the blame for the crisis. The accusation was that mainstream models had made simplifying
assumptions that had come badly unstuck. Mr Tucker doubted that many leading economists had seriously
‘moved into’ their modelled world. But in any case even if they had, they were not responsible for policy. By
contrast, policymakers have a special responsibility to ‘suspend belief’ when employing models. All that
should matter to them is grasping the way the world works, and helping it to work better. If economics cannot
explain, with a structural model, something that is widely perceived to occur, policymakers should not ignore
the phenomenon. Bubbles, the search for yield and, more or less, anything whose effects violate ModiglianiMiller arguably fell into this category in the past. There were two underlying problems. One was a lack of
charity, within economics, in listening to views across disciplinary boundaries or schools of thought. Finance
and macro, in particular, were too far apart. The other, deeper problem, he argued, was epistemological. 'It is
no good policymakers counting as ‘knowledge’ only those things that are accepted as robust features of the
data or as ‘results’ from a structural model.'

Some things can be ‘known’ by, for example, financial market practitioners in the same way that GE Moore
knew he existed when, famously, he waved his hand at his philosophy class in Cambridge approaching a
century ago. That kind of ‘informal’ knowledge should prompt our curiosity and engagement as economists
and policymakers.

Another possible example is the so-called ‘risk channel’ of monetary policy. Until recently, policymakers have
had a tendency to doubt suggestions that persistently accommodative policy fuelled risk taking. But there is
emerging evidence that monetary policy can affect term premia. Both Jeremy Stein and Paul Tucker himself
had set that out publicly. He mentioned this not because monetary policymakers should necessarily avoid
policies that affect risk taking, but rather because the other, financial-stability side of our brains – in the UK,
the Bank’s Financial Policy Committee – should be alive to those effects when setting regulatory policy for
banking. Making a success of that, he argued, calls for curiosity and generosity of spirit in our enquiries and
work. If nothing else, this conference would surely have helped to foster that spirit.

2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

2

