Resolution in context: the policy drivers of the new paradigm
Speech given by
Andrew Gracie, Executive Director, Resolution, Bank of England

Annual Risk Minds Conference, Amsterdam
Monday 8 December 2014

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Three years ago the Financial Stability Board published the “Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes”.

The objective of the Key Attributes was to ensure that we can let banks fail without causing excessive
collateral damage to the financial system and the real economy and that we can let banks fail without the
taxpayer footing the bill.

Bail-in not bail-out

We have come a long way from where we were in 2011. However, at the risk of stating the obvious, let me
remind you of why we want to ensure that we never again have to bail out banks.

First, bail-outs are unfair. The implicit government guarantee enjoyed by ‘too-big-to-fail’ banks has meant
that while taxpayers bore the risks of failure and the costs of the financial crisis, profits in the good times
were enjoyed by private investors.

The ability for private investors to take the rewards but not the risks of their investments is at odds with a free
market economy. Some have argued, however, that ultimately this is less of a problem since taxpayers and
investors tend to be the same people.

But this claim is not supported by the data. In the UK, the top 10% of households own almost 45% of overall
wealth. For pension funds, one of the largest investors in bank debt, the distribution is even more skewed:
the same households own almost 50% of private pension wealth.1

By protecting investors, a small self-selecting group of people stands to reap most of the benefits of
risk-taking by banks, while the losses arising from bail-outs are spread out across taxpayers. This may take
the form of higher taxes or may deprive governments of funds to build schools and hospitals. In the
dislocation of the crisis, it has also resulted in cuts in welfare, hitting those least likely to benefit from banks’
profits.

This comparison does not even consider the international dimension of the problem: investors, especially
those investing in global banks, are not necessarily based in the UK, while taxpayers are. Again, this implies
that the people who benefit from the upside may not be the same that bear the downside risk.

Second, bail-outs create moral hazard. Without a credible resolution regime, a government cannot walk
away from its ‘implicit guarantee’ of banks. And it cannot charge a price that reflects the risks it is facing and
the increase in its own cost of debt. Hence, a government cannot exert ‘market discipline’. In contrast,

1

Source: Wealth and Assets Survey for years 2010/2012, Office for National Statistics. Note that in contrast to private pensions, public
pensions are only backed by the government’s promise of future payments. Hence, state pensioners are not bank creditors. If anything,
they are creditors of the government and bear the cost of any bail-outs.
2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2

creditors can decide not to roll over a bank’s debt if they do not like the risks they are exposed to. Or they
can demand a return that compensates them for higher risks.

Unlike shareholders, uninsured creditors do not benefit from the upside of the borrower’s risk-taking and are
hence inherently risk-averse. They focus on downside risk and may be effective monitors of risk-taking by
banks once they no longer benefit from government guarantees.2

If banks’ funding costs become more reactive to the risks they are taking this reduces banks’ incentives for
‘excessive’ risk-taking.3 It should also act as an additional check on leverage by reducing banks’ incentives
to over-lend during a boom (and to enter a crisis more than 30 times leveraged). Both of these factors should
make the financial system more resilient. If some risky lending becomes more expensive due to credible
resolution regimes, then this is a sign that the medicine is working.

Third, it is not obvious that governments are best placed to absorb losses in a crisis. The losses of a failed
bank will always be borne by individuals, just like losses of any other firm. They cannot evaporate behind
some corporate veil. But institutions with a strong balance sheet can absorb the initial impact and spread the
pain over time.

We might think that governments are best placed to absorb shocks in a systemic crisis. However, this is hard
to reconcile with experience. In Spain and Cyprus, governments were unable to absorb losses stemming
from multiple bank failures. They ended up having to impose losses on bank creditors.

In countries like the UK, the government bailed out banks. But because of the strain that these bail-outs put
on public finances, governments felt that they had to impose strict austerity measures to cope with the
contingent risks to their balance sheets. Moreover, many sovereigns’ credit worthiness deteriorated, which
put pressure on the prices of government bonds and on the banks that held them. This is what became
known as the sovereign-banking feedback loop

All of this suggests that even when ignoring fairness and moral hazard, it is unclear if bail-outs are the best
way to cope with a banking crisis. In a systemic crisis it may be particularly challenging for governments to
absorb the (entire) cost of multiple bank failures.

2

Effectively, shareholders own a call option on a firm’s asset value. In the absence of perfect market discipline this can give
shareholders incentives to urge the management to take more risks. See e.g. M. Jensen and Meckling W., "Theory of the Firm:
Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs, and Capital Structure.", 1976, Journal of Financial Economics, 3: 305-60. For creditors the
opposite is the case: they suffer from uncertainty and should favour more prudent investment choices.
3
The academic literature provides evidence that market discipline is undermined by implicit government guarantees. See e.g. Acharya,
V., Anginer, D. and Wharburton, A., “The End of Market Discipline? Investor Expectations of Implicit Government Guarantees”, 2014,
mimeo or Afonso, G., Santos, J. and Traina, J., “Do Too-Big-To-Fail Banks Take on More Risk?”, 2014, NY Fed Economic Policy
Review, 20(2).
3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

3

Bail-in is not just about avoiding bail-outs. Some have advocated achieving this by setting much higher
capital requirements instead. But it is essential for the health of the system to make resolution work and
banks ‘safe to fail’.

We of course do not want banks to fail as soon as they encounter difficulties. We need a strong macro and
micro prudential framework, which includes provisions for capital buffers that are usable without entry to
resolution. But there is not an appetite for imposing capital requirements that cover any imaginable loss a
bank could face. Banks will not be ‘fail-safe’. So we have to make resolution work and make them ‘safe to
fail’.

Even if we could impose arbitrarily high capital requirements, it is not clear that we would want to do so. By
keeping firms from failing we undermine the ‘creative destruction’ that characterises any competitive industry.
We have to remove ‘barriers to exit’ that keep firms with bad business models in the market and prevent
others from entering.

This is achieved by resolution. The entry into resolution means that the bank has failed. And resolution
entails many of the consequences that we would expect to see in insolvency, while also maintaining financial
stability. Following the ‘resolution weekend’, the bank would be restructured, its critical economic functions
may be sold and other business lines may be wound down over time and in an orderly way. Throughout this
process, insured deposits would be protected and depositors would have access to their accounts.

The credible prospect of failure is also a valuable disciplining device for a firms’ management. If managers
know that they will either need to pay their creditors tomorrow or fail, they will be more careful with the risks
they take today.4

Bail-in is one specific resolution tool – a legal mechanism for imposing losses on creditors. In a bail-in some
of a bank’s liabilities are written down or converted into equity to ensure that a bank can once more meet its
capital requirements and command market confidence during the restructuring period. This is often confused
with the write-down of a contingent convertible bond, a so-called ‘CoCo’ that banks may, in at least some
cases, use to meet certain of the existing Basel III capital requirements. However, almost any unsecured
liability can be exposed to loss in resolution, not just CoCos.

4

This is what the academic literature calls the ‘free cash-flow effect’. According to this theory, debt funding features an implicit
commitment by investors to let a firm fail if the firm does not return funds to its investors (e.g. via coupon payments). However, this
relies on failure being a credible option. Exclusively equity-funded firms do not have to return funds to investors and managers may
hence be more likely to use funds for the purpose of ‘vanity projects’ or ‘empire-building’. See e.g. Jensen, M., “Agency costs of free
cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers”, 1986, American Economic Review, 76(2): 323-329.
4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

4

This distinction is important for a number of reasons:

First, I don’t think we will ever have enough CoCos to cover all realistic loss-absorption and recapitalization
needs in resolution.

Second, the write-down of a CoCo does not in itself address the cause of a failure. It would usually need to
be accompanied by other resolution actions.

Third, resolution may become necessary before the trigger for converting the CoCo is reached.

Finally, and most importantly, most CoCos are highly complex products. It is doubtful they are fully
understood by investors in all cases. For example, from a creditor perspective CoCos that write down to zero
effectively rank junior to equity. And it is not clear that investors appreciate the incentive effects that some
CoCos create. At their trigger point, many CoCos transfer wealth to existing shareholders. This means that
shareholders’ profits increase if the firm performs worse and triggers the conversion of its CoCos.5

The risk that standard liabilities will be written down or converted to equity in resolution is considerably easier
to understand. When exposing liabilities to losses and carrying out a recapitalisation by conversions to
equity, resolution authorities are committed to following the creditor hierarchy closely. The treatment of bond
holders as a result should not differ from the treatment of corporate bondholders in insolvency. And it would
not have the perverse incentive effects of some CoCos.

Making resolution credible

Prior to the crisis, policy-makers around the world advocated a policy of “constructive ambiguity” when it
came to the possibility of bank bail-outs. It was thought to be “ambiguous” as policymakers tried to keep
banks in the dark on what they would do if a large bank were to fail. And it was considered to be
“constructive” since it was supposed to encourage banks not to rely on bail-outs, without tying the
government’s hands in a crisis.

This turned out to be neither ambiguous nor constructive. It was not ambiguous since bankers and investors
surmised – correctly it transpired – that governments would bail banks out. And they chose their investments
and priced risk accordingly. And it did not turn out to be constructive since creditors came to expect that they
would not suffer losses. When Lehman was allowed to fail, bank creditors rapidly changed their expectations
and funding costs across the financial system skyrocketed. Effectively, governments had tied their hands.
They were unable to let another bank fail without causing wide-spread panic.

5

See Berg, T and Kaserer, C., “Does Contingent Capital Induce Excessive Risk-Taking?”, 2014, mimeo.
5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

5

Resolution is changing this. It replaces what was thought to be “constructive ambiguity” with ex-ante clarity.
We are clear that we will let banks fail. And that in resolution, losses will be absorbed in a way that is
predictable and consistent with the creditor hierarchy. Resolution will always involve an element of discretion.
But we do not want to surprise markets. The discretion is merely a result of the fact that we cannot describe
our reaction function for every firm and in every state of the world ex-ante. This is similar to what has
become known as ‘constrained discretion’ in monetary policy.6 While we firmly commit to an outcome, we
have to retain some discretion on how exactly to achieve it.

There are encouraging signs that market participants have been listening.

Estimates of the implicit subsidies that banks receive due to perceived government guarantees have been
declining over the past years. While part of this may reflect cyclical trends, it is still welcome news.7
Separately, rating agencies are also changing their assumptions regarding government support and argue
that it is becoming less likely that banks will be bailed out.

Convincing market participants that we are serious is essential to ensure that the resolution of a systemically
important bank would not trigger market panic. If investors are fully aware of the risk of bail-in, bail-in will not
come as a surprise. And creditors of other banks will not withdraw funding simply because the creditors of
one bank are not bailed-out.

However, investors will not change their expectations (just) because of convincing speeches.

We are also designing a regime that makes resolution time-consistent and the threat of failure credible. The
work we have done and the work we still have to do should ensure that when it comes down to the choice
between bail-outs and resolution, governments will prefer resolution.

Let me highlight some of the areas where we have made progress.


In Europe, the legal tools to resolve a bank in an orderly fashion are now enshrined in legislation via the
“Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive” (BRRD) and will come into force in January. The BRRD also
includes a requirement to expose at least 8% of a bank’s creditors to loss before accessing resolution
funds.



The FSB has provided guidance on the interplay between resolution and group structures. The proposed
approach greatly simplifies the bail-in process. And it limits the amount of resources needed to resolve

6

See e.g. Bernanke, B., "Constrained Discretion and Monetary Policy”, 2003, (Speech at the New York University). Haldane, A.,
“Constraining discretion in bank regulation”, 2013, (Speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta) introduced the term of constrained
discretion in the context of prudential regulation, albeit in a different context.
7
The value of implicit government guarantees to banks depends not only on the probability that failing banks receive bail-outs, but also
on the probability that banks will threaten to become non-viable in the first place. Hence, we would expect implicit subsidies to decline in
times of lower uncertainty.
6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

6

multiple banks within a limited time frame. In the case of “Single-Point-of-Entry” banks, we would aim to
only apply resolution tools to one entity in the group. But even in “Multiple-Point-of-Entry” banks, only a
small number of entities would be put into resolution. We would not resolve a cross-border group on an
entity-by-entity basis.


A protocol to ISDA netting agreements has been agreed to ensure that OTC derivative contracts are not
closed out in a disorderly way as a bank enters resolution. This agreement is a crucial supplement to
statutory stays and ensures that stays are effective in a cross-border context. While this protocol is
voluntary, it has already been adopted by the 18 largest dealer banks and we intend to encourage more
market participants to sign up to it.



We have finished in the FSB the first round of Resolvability Assessment Processes (RAP) reviewing
resolution strategies prepared in Crisis Management Groups for G-SIBs. These RAPs have given us
valuable insight on the remaining barriers to resolution – significantly, there is consistency across G-SIBs
as to the key barriers to resolvability. This is clear from the FSB’s report on G-SIB resolvability to the
G20 leaders in Brisbane. Resolvability is not binary and work to address the barriers will help us to make
G-SIBs progressively more resolvable. Moreover, as barriers are removed, authorities will be able to
communicate more clearly how resolution will look in practice.

Total Loss Absorbing Capacity

Finally, this November the FSB’s proposed a standard on “total loss absorbing capacity”. This is a watershed
moment in ending TBTF. The standard will ensure that G-SIBs have sufficient loss-absorbing capacity that
can be credibly bailed-in in resolution to recapitalise the G-SIB and to ensure that the G-SIB can
subsequently be restructured or wound down in an orderly fashion.

But why do we need such designated loss-absorbing capacity?

In principle, every liability is loss-absorbing. If a firm does not have the assets to repay a certain liability, the
liability will not be repaid. It absorbs losses. This is mirrored in the design of bail-in regimes: most statutory
bail-in regimes allow authorities to impose losses on a wide set of liabilities.

However, liabilities differ with respect to how ‘readily’ they absorb losses. For some liabilities bail-in is
operationally difficult whether for legal enforceability, valuation or other reasons. For others, their bail-in may
undermine the objectives of financial stability and continuity of critical functions that the bail-in is designed to
achieve.

This has been recognized by the FSB. The TLAC requirement forces G-SIBs to hold a sufficient amount of
liabilities that are most readily loss-absorbing. Faced with the risk of bail-in G-SIBs might want to replace
7

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

7

liabilities that are easy to bail-in by cheaper liabilities that are harder to bail-in. A minimum TLAC standard
prevents this.8

Should we be concerned about contagion when bailing in TLAC that is held by other banks?

Yes, we should. This is the reason why the Basel Committee is currently developing policies that will
significantly reduce banks’ incentives to invest in TLAC-eligible instruments. And banks that do invest in
TLAC may need to increase their own loss-absorbing capacity.

For banks, the risk of contagion may be particularly high since they may already be under stress at the point
where a G-SIB fails. Also, few financial institutions are as leveraged as banks. However, this does not mean
that other investors shouldn’t prepare for potential losses arising from bail-in. There is no reason why a
pension or investment fund should expect to be exposed to losses following the default of a corporate, but
not following the default of a G-SIB.

Isn’t bail-in of TLAC likely to be disruptive and subject to legal challenge?

As resolution will result in creditors bearing losses, it is quite possible, if not probable, that some may seek to
challenge aspects of the resolution in the courts. But we have included in resolution regimes a set of creditor
safeguards which minimise the likelihood that litigation will be successful, by making it unlikely that
discretionary actions by a resolution authority will penalise creditors relative to the ‘insolvency
counterfactual’.

We aim to follow the creditor hierarchy closely and to preserve franchise value in resolution. This minimises
the risk that creditors are worse off than insolvency, which would entitle them to ex-post compensation. And
it is the reason why we require TLAC to be subordinated. If legal recourse is successful, creditors should be
compensated ex-post. But recourse cannot be used as a bargaining technique or to undermine successful
execution over the resolution weekend.

I want to stress that even a successful resolution of a G-SIB will inevitably result in some disruption and
uncertainty, particularly when the tools are used for the first time. But this disruption can be tolerated when
set against the benefits of ending “too-big-to-fail” and the long-term costs of bail-out.
How about liquidity? Bail-in does not create new liquid assets.

Liquidity and solvency are related: every pound of liabilities that is converted into equity does not have to be
repaid or serviced through coupon payments. This reduces liquidity outflows. More importantly, a strongly

8

The FSB proposal only covers the Pillar 1 minimum requirement for TLAC. Authorities may choose to apply additional Pillar 2 add-ons
to ensure that sufficient loss-absorbing capacity is available in resolution.
8

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

8

capitalised institution should be able to retain liabilities or to attract new funds. This is why we have pushed
for a robust calibration of TLAC.

However, this may not be enough. Some public liquidity backstop may be needed to make resolution work.
In some regimes, a resolution fund is established for this purpose. In others, the central bank might perform
this back stop role. But this still requires a robust calibration of TLAC to ensure that any public lending is not
subject to meaningful solvency risk.

What about a systemic crisis? Surely bail-in of TLAC cannot solve a systemic crisis.

As I have argued before, in a systemic crisis the government may be the last ‘person’ that is able to absorb
any additional losses. This would leave bail-in (or other forms of resolution) as the only option.

But even if the government decides to offer support, a robust resolution framework can still ensure that
creditors bear some of the costs of failure. This is beneficial for a number of reasons. Let me highlight two
aspects that I believe to be particularly important.

First, there is a path-dependency to government support. In the early stages of the crisis by bailing out small
banks, government reinforced perceptions that other institutions of similar or higher systemic importance
would be saved, too. This tied the government’s hands once other banks did fail. If a credible resolution
regime allows us to impose losses on creditors at the beginning of a crisis, then we retain the option of
bailing in other creditors later on without surprising investors and without triggering a sudden re-pricing of
risk.

Second, a government’s ability to support the financial system will always be limited. So by imposing losses
on some creditors, it can ensure that it will be able to offer support in situations where doing so is most
important to protect financial stability.

Where next?

Over the past three years we have made considerable progress on making resolution a credible option.
However, we know that more remains to be done to make it fully effective. Let me highlight just a few of the
items on our agenda.

First, we need to implement the standards that have been agreed:


The FSB is currently consulting on its proposal on TLAC and is conducting a comprehensive impact
assessment to inform the final calibration. The goal is to finalize the standard in time for the G20 leaders
summit in 2015. Subsequently, it may have to be transposed into national laws. And banks will have at
9

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

9

least until 2019 to comply. In the EU, the Minimum Requirement for Own Funds and Eligible Liabilities
(MREL) that will apply to all EU banks from 2016 onwards offers a good framework to implement the
TLAC standard for G-SIBs.


The ISDA protocol on derivative stays has been a major achievement and in 2015 we will need to ensure
that other banks and the buy-side buy into it. The FSB expects the rest of the G-SIB population to
adhere to the protocol by the end of 2015 and regulators have committed to measures that will require a
broad range of firms to have such provisions in their trading agreements. This will ensure a level
playing-field across market counterparties.

Second, we need to work on post-resolution restructuring, which is critical to preventing the resolved bank
from succumbing to a second failure. This will require ensuring operational continuity beyond the ‘resolution
weekend’. But it also involves a clear vision of how we expect a failed bank or its successors to look a year
after entering into resolution and thereafter. A large scale restructuring of a G-SIB may take as much as four
or five years and will involve significant costs, potentially 10-20% of annual revenues. The time and costs
demonstrate the importance of ex-ante preparation in our ability to effectively restructure a bank following
resolution.

In the UK the ring-fencing of retail banks is one example for this ex-ante preparation. Ex-ante planning can
also provide a deeper understanding of which business lines can be effectively sold or wound-down in a
manner that may further limit restructuring costs and protect the value of the continuing business. But it is
also very important that a bank has sufficient loss-absorbing capacity to cover the anticipated costs of
restructuring.

Finally, we will have to turn our attention to access to financial market infrastructure and the resolvability of
FMIs themselves.

If a bank loses access to FMIs simply because it enters resolution, then this is almost guaranteed to threaten
the continuity of critical economic functions and financial stability more broadly. Hence, we need to ensure
that this does not happen.

But many FMIs are themselves systemically important. So they should be subject to appropriate resolution
arrangements. Due to the financial risks they are exposed to, central counterparties (CCPs) are probably top
of the list. We expect EU legislation on CCP resolution in 2015, and given the global reach of CCPs, it is
critical to ensure that it is consistent with the internationally agreed principles set out in the Key Attributes
and the supporting annex.

This covers not only the tools and safeguards available in resolution, but also powers to assess and enhance
the resolvability of CCPs ex-ante, including the amount of loss absorbing capacity in their liability structure.
10

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

10

11

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

11

