Risk transfer – and the risks it creates: a prudential regulatory
perspective
Speech given by
Andrew Bulley, Director of Life Insurance, Prudential Regulation Authority

The 2016 Bulk Annuities and Longevity Risk Transfer conference, London
28 April 2016

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

It is a great pleasure to speak to you today. May I firstly congratulate the conference organisers today on
their choice of subject topic – namely bulk purchase annuities and longevity risk transfers – both of which are
extremely topical and timely and give me a welcome opportunity to give the regulator’s perspective.

What I plan to cover today essentially follows on from a speech I gave in February at the Investment and Life
Assurance Group (ILAG) Conference in London. You may have seen that this got some press coverage,
complete with, surprisingly, a photo of myself in one august journal – I had not realised the subject would be
so popular! At that event, I introduced the Bank of England’s perspective on the topic of longevity risk
transfer and I would like today to give that topic some further consideration as well as discussing the Bulk
Purchase Annuities (BPA) market and current trends we are seeing here. These two topics are not of course
mutually exclusive: bulk purchase deals, usually involving transfer of large blocks of liabilities, often rely on
the availability to the insurer of risk transfer mechanisms. It is, moreover, important to recognise that “risk
management” in this context in practice needs to embrace many discrete and challenging areas of risk: in
particular, pricing, asset allocation, longevity, the practical machinery of risk transfer, and documentation and
operational risks generally all come fully into play in this market.

The backcloth to all these matters of course is Solvency II. For some 119 days now, the insurance sector has
been operating under the regulatory framework of Solvency II. Getting to this point has been no mean feat
and has taken practitioners and regulators alike many years of concerted effort to implement. However,
whilst Solvency II is still in its infancy, at least as an operative regime, if not in design, all the signs are that it
is bedding down well as “the new normal”.
Solvency II is often and rightly described as a “once in a generation” reform of all aspects of insurance
regulation. It is, moreover, a maximum harmonizing Directive. But given the context – 28 jurisdictions and
national regimes, each with discrete macroeconomic and insurance product and market structures – it would
be unrealistic to expect that the Directive would, overnight, impose a complete uniformity of prudential
regulation. There are transitional measures in place, some extending out by some 16 years in order to make
the shift from Solvency I to Solvency II smoother for individual jurisdictions. These differences mean that
complete harmonisation is not yet fully in place and so comparisons across markets must still be qualified.
Nevertheless, we have taken a massive step towards a genuinely harmonised system for capital
requirements, governance and risk management standards, group supervision, data gathering and reporting,
and public disclosure.
As the new Solvency II rules fully bed-down and become the new ‘business as usual’, wrinkles in the regime
will need to be ironed out. Meanwhile, Solvency II will undoubtedly have an impact on our insurers, impacts
that are already manifesting themselves through changes to business models and strategies.

Meanwhile, the reforms announced in the 2014 Budget have, somewhat unusually for the industry, made
pensions regular front page news and have of course led many insurers to rethink their strategies and
2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2

approach to the retirement market. Since the reforms came into effect in April last year, there has been a
sharp decline in individual annuity sales, with only 17,800 sold in the first three months of the new regime
(April-June 2015)1 – this represents a fall in sales to about a quarter of the level that prevailed before the
reforms were announced.

The significant fall in volume of the individual at-retirement market has led insurers to look instead to new
product designs to replace individual annuities business. It has also encouraged more insurers to enter the
bulk annuity market as a way of deploying their existing skills and experience in longevity risk management
to offset the decline in sales of individual annuities. With a large number of insurers looking to achieve a
market share, the bulk annuity market is likely to become increasingly competitive and it would seem
reasonable to expect this unleashing of competitive forces in turn to lead to some erosion in margins.

As I mentioned in my February speech to ILAG, this increasingly competitive business environment is also
being affected by the prevailing low interest rate environment and this is placing additional pressure on profit
margins. Here discussion inevitably turns to the risk margin component of Solvency II, which is perhaps the
single biggest design difference in the new regime compared to the ICAS/P2/realistic balance sheet regime
we introduced in the UK a decade ago under the umbrella known as the Tiner reforms.

Let me say a few words as to our view of the risk margin. We at the Bank recognise that the current design
of the risk margin makes it highly sensitive to interest rate conditions to a degree that was probably not
foreseen by the system’s architects and is undesirable. In the Bank’s recent and public response to the
European Commission’s Call for Evidence on the topic of EU Financial services regulation, which is available
on the Bank’s web site, we noted that this level of interest rate sensitivity was making the risk margin
excessively volatile and that this was likely in turn to have significant absolute and hedging costs for firms.
We also noted that this degree of volatility was likely to be undesirable from both a macro and
microprudential point of view because of its potential to promote pro-cyclical investment behavior.
Consequently, whilst we support the concept and purpose of the risk margin, our view is that its design
needs to deliver more stable balance sheet outcomes for insurers and hence support their key role as long
term investors in the real economy.

Bearing in mind this confluence of competitive pressure and the mechanical operation of the new regime,
Solvency II could provide firms with a powerful incentive to carry out trades to transfer longevity risk by way
of reinsurance. That is particularly the case with new business which does not have the benefit of
transitional measures. Transferring risk in this way could ease the net financial impact of having to hold a
risk margin in respect of the reinsured liabilities; but in turn any such transfer also brings into play a number

1 Source ABI. This compares with 74,100 individual annuities sold in Q1 2014 (the last quarter before the reforms were announced in
the 2014 Budget). It even represents a significant further reduction on the 20,600 annuities sold in the first quarter of 2015.

3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

3

of substantial risk management and regulatory considerations and so can hardly be considered to be risk
free.

Now we recognise of course that reinsurance is an inherent and important part of the risk management
arsenal available to insurers and that it has long established and entirely legitimate uses. Nevertheless, we
have also made clear that the Bank will be monitoring closely if firms become active in longevity reinsurance
regularly and exclusively for motivations other than seeking a genuine transfer of risk or in any way that calls
into question the adequacy and effectiveness of policyholder protection. The importance of ensuring policy
holder protection is enshrined in the wording of the Directive and lies at the heart of it as a construct – and as
the regulator, we will seek, through our supervisory judgments and approach, to uphold what for us is this
cardinal objective.

Bulk Purchase Annuities (BPA)

I would like to turn briefly to recent trends and developments in the Bulk Purchase Annuities (BPA) market.

Defined Benefit (DB) pension schemes are increasingly looking for ways to reduce their risk exposures.
Insurers are well placed in principle to provide solutions and this has resulted in an increase in pension
de-risking transactions in the form of buy-ins, buy-outs and longevity swaps in recent years. Indeed many
commentators have argued that insurers are the natural home for the long term risks associated with
pension schemes and so have welcomed this development. As the prudential insurance regulator we are
not blind to the potential business opportunities and competitive advantage of insurers in this area.
However, there are areas in which it would be appropriate for me as a prudential regulator – and you would
expect nothing less of me here (!) - to strike some cautionary notes, particularly for those firms that are new
to this market.

Let me start with market size. The market has grown substantially in recent years, with bulk annuity deal
flows increasing from £4bn in 2012 to just over £13bn in 2014; 2015 also saw over £10bn liabilities
transferred to the insurance market through buy-in and buy-outs.

However these figures pale in comparison to the potential size of the market. Total liabilities of UK DB
pension schemes currently stand at £2 trillion and to date only £150bn of these have been transferred to
insurers. One analysis I have seen suggests that a transfer of just a quarter of these DB liabilities would
consume all of the present excess capacity of the UK insurance market.

This all has the makings of a potentially massive market opportunity. There is also an argument that a wider
social good is done. By taking out pension liabilities, insurers can enable corporates in other sectors either
to focus more on their core business propositions and/or reduce the risk of disorderly wind down. However,
in the past we have seen instances in the BPA market where:
4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

4

Firstly, in order to gain market presence, pressure has been put on firms with shorter track records to use
price as a differentiating factor in order to win initial deals; and in turn, price has been actively seen as a
good lever with which to attract the necessary volume of bulk contracts, particularly where firms are seeking
urgently to replace ‘lost’ volumes of other business.

For me, as a non- actuary I hasten to add, one particular fact stands out crucially in all this: whilst pricing
errors can cause problems in the individual market, in the bulk market the effects of such errors are
inherently magnified, indeed one might even say supercharged, to a degree that in extremis could be highly
damaging for the firm concerned. Taking on large volumes of under-priced annuities in one fell swoop carries
a high likelihood of pressure on capital availability for many years to come as that business runs off. It is
also likely to make any attempts to transfer risks associated with the business look relatively expensive and
hence unattractive or unviable, which in turn creates a further regulatory problem.

On a related note, to become, or indeed remain, competitive in a low interest rate environment, firms may
succumb to the temptation to venture into asset classes where they have no, or limited, experience. We saw
some instances of this in recent years where new firms tried to enter the individual enhanced annuity market
but struggled to price competitively with a corporate-bond based asset strategy. We see potential parallels
today in the bulk purchase space. Solvency II places strong emphasis on good risk management and the
prudent person principles. I take this opportunity to remind firms that these requirements need to be met.

As a final point on market size, we observe that many firms enter into the bulk market with stated limits on
minimum and maximum deal sizes as part of their risk management. But we also occasionally observe that
these limits can be overridden because they are viewed only as a “soft” or “indicative” limit; or indeed they
may simply and conveniently be forgotten when larger or smaller schemes become available. Where we
observe such behaviour, we are concerned because it suggests that these limits were not intended to be
adhered to in the first place and therefore calls into question the effectiveness of firms’ risk management,
culture and governance.
Moving on to the more operational aspects, our over-arching concern is to ensure that a firm’s governance,
risk management and operational processes are fit for the task of taking on pension liabilities in bulk, even
where the capital strain is manageable.

I emphasise that it is no trivial matter to manage the transfer of pensions to the insurance sector. Pension
scheme liabilities often require a highly granular data cleansing exercise to be undertaken with scheme rules
and trustee-level contractual clauses potentially further adding to the complexity. Care is also required
around the legal basis of the transfer and the definition of risks that are and are not to be transferred. Firms
therefore cannot approach this market in the same way as they do individual business. Systems and
processes will be required to allow for a smooth transfer as well as sound on-going management of the
assumed liabilities.
5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

5

For example, firms will need to consider how to allow for features specific to bulk transactions such as:


ensuring that scheme rules, if applicable, continue to be applied to the correct policies.



making sure any changes to pensions legislation are appropriately allowed for; and,



obtaining appropriate assets to match the inflation indices to which the pension scheme liabilities are
linked.

For buy-in contracts, options and benefits provided for the scheme itself are also potential ways in which
insurers can differentiate themselves to win business. We have seen a wide range of such features
including surrender options, collateral arrangements and the options to defer premiums or include additional
business at a later date. Whilst we have no particular concerns in principle about this, we have seen
instances where contracts have had to be revisited in the light of such options, with the end result turning out
to be quite different from what the insurer originally envisaged. Such options can also often present
particular challenges for matching adjustment eligibility and so need careful consideration before being
included in a matching adjustment portfolio.

Few firms will have either operational or financial capacity for more than a handful of medium-sized bulk
deals in any one year. I have touched on a number of the operational issues already so now let me turn to
the financial capacity of firms to take on liabilities in bulk as my final point on this market.

Specifically, where balance sheet constraints are in play, firms will either need to limit business amounts or
find a way to increase capacity. One such way to increase capacity is via transfer of some or all of the risks
assumed under the bulk purchase transaction. This leads us back squarely to the topic of longevity risk
transfer.

Longevity Risk Transfer

Let me start by considering what longevity risk transfer means in practice.

Risk transfer is an essential tool for managing risk exposures and profiles. For a number of years there has
been an active market in the transfer of longevity risk although we recognise that this is not as well
developed as market participants would like. A lot of the issues turn on two essential characteristics of
longevity risk:

Longevity risk can be quite bespoke to individual firms and exposures. Off-the-shelf index-based solutions
can therefore be deeply unattractive to an insurer seeking to manage its risk profile.

6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

6

Moreover, longevity risk is a long-tailed risk. However, there is a limit to the number of capital market
participants that are willing to provide long-term risk transfer solutions. Exposure to rollover risk on the risk
transfer instruments is not something that would normally be acceptable to a transferring entity. As a
prudential regulator we also have material reservations as to the adequacy of risk transfer that would be
achieved through such solutions.

As to the risk transfer market that currently exists, insurers may choose to transfer longevity risk for a variety
of reasons bespoke to the business and its business requirements. However, one or more of the following
reasons could also be at play:

Firstly, longevity transfers enable firms to balance their overall risk exposure and reduce concentrations of
risk. The growth of the bulk purchase annuity market (which is essentially another mechanism enabling
pension schemes to transfer longevity risk to insurers) increases, as a second order effect, the demand for
longevity reinsurance by insurers as they lay-off some of the additional risk concentrations assumed.

Secondly, as I noted earlier, the costs of the risk margin for new business under Solvency II may be creating
incentives, at least in principle, for firms to amend their business models towards greater use of risk transfer.

Looking across this market, it is clear that longevity risk transfers are on an increasing trend. Longevity risk
transfer transactions have covered at least £131bn of insurance and pension scheme liabilities since June
2009. After a slow start, with just over 20 longevity swaps transacted between 2009 and 2012, the longevity
swap market gathered pace with the highest number of transactions taking place during 2014 with a record
of £40 billion liabilities hedged2.

I hasten to add that reinsuring risk can form part of a genuine risk management strategy. But as part of the
decision to transfer risk to a reinsurer we expect boards of insurance companies to understand rigorously the
mechanics of the risk transfer taking place and to take into account any wider associated risks which may
arise. This is because such transfers are not risk free; to transfer one set of risks, other risks have to be
assumed. In particular, when an insurer transfers risk to a single or small number of reinsurers, it inherently
exposes itself to counterparty credit risk and, potentially, concentration risk. In a nutshell, it falls to boards to
ask themselves in what circumstances might the transfer breakdown such that the liabilities end up on their
balance sheet, and the probability and consequence of that.

We therefore look to Boards to monitor, manage and mitigate these risks with a critical, searching
perspective and with a particular focus on collateral arrangements.

2 Hymans Robertson
7

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

7

In particular, boards should ensure that the firms’ overall risk transfer strategy is consistent with the
Solvency II requirements on risk management and the prudent person principle. Specifically, firms need to
have in place a risk management system which monitors, manages and mitigates ‘concentration risks’
arising from its risk transfer strategy and ensure that it is appropriately reflected in the SCR. Boards should
satisfy themselves that that the associated capital requirements, whether calculated using standard formula
or internal model, appropriately reflect the risk profile of the firm.

Our expectations surrounding reinsurance have not changed as a consequence of Solvency II. It is,
however, important that we are sighted when insurers are entering into these transactions and understand
fully the rationale and terms on which they are doing so. The PRA will use this information to inform our
supervisory strategy and keep up to date with market developments. I emphasise that it would be
unacceptable to us if firms were to use this market primarily as a tool to achieve regulatory arbitrage and to
avoid key in-built requirements of our new solvency regime rather than to manage their risks in the interests
of their policyholder and the firm.

Conclusion

There are a number of external factors at play which could well act as a driver for insurers to consider
making changes to their business models and consequently their risk profiles, by way of risk transfers.
Whilst the insurance market may be operating at a time of increased transformation and change, to be clear,
there has been no change in our expectations of firms when it comes to ensuring the necessary prudence in
business model decisions and reinsurance. We remind firms that their usual approach to making strategy
decisions should continue. Boards should make certain that they fully appreciate the risk transfer taking
place and any knock-on implications there may be. Appropriate risk management systems should be put in
place to reflect the changed risk profile of the firm.

With regulators and regulated alike now adapting to the brave new world of Solvency II, we ask that insurers
maintain an open dialogue with us as their prudential regulator on all of the market developments and risk
areas that this conference is usefully covering today. For our part, we shall be watching developments
closely and will continue to welcome an informed and detailed dialogue with market participants on all
aspects of the BPA and longevity transfer markets. Doubtless that dialogue will be keenly pursued by both
sides of the regulatory relationship.

8

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

8

