Risks to the Commercial Property Market and Financial
Stability
Speech given by
Nigel Jenkinson, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England

30 November 2006

I am very grateful to my colleagues Sarah Fish and Rob Hamilton for their help and assistance and to
Ian Bond and Mike Cross for helpful comments.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2
Summary
Historically, the commercial property sector has been particularly vulnerable to any
cyclical deterioration, with knock-on effects to the wider financial system. In recent
years commercial property prices have risen sharply, accompanied by a rapid increase
in bank lending to the sector. Yields have fallen to historically low levels. But
although there are similarities with previous booms, including sharp price rises, there
are also important differences, including the benefits of continued financial market
innovation. Against this background, it is prudent to monitor market conditions
closely and to stress test portfolios against adverse outcomes.

1

Brief recourse to the history of Brighthelmstone, or Brighton as we now know it,

reveals a turbulent past. In 1514, the town was burnt to the ground by French raiders,
whilst 1703 saw many houses washed away during a great storm. In 1984 the world
was shocked when IRA activists bombed the Conservative party conference in this
hotel. And most recently it has seen the demise and gradual collapse of the iconic
West Pier, which was finally declared beyond repair just over 2 years ago. Yet
against this background, the town has been transformed from a small fishing village to
the highly fashionable city we find ourselves in today. This picture of rapid growth
punctuated by occasional major, adverse events is closely related to the topic I wish to
discuss today.
2

The commercial property sector has a similarly turbulent history, at least over the

most recent past. Periods of sharp and dramatic appreciation in capital values have
been frequently followed by periods of significant decline. And, in several cases,
these episodes have been associated with wider financial system stress. The early
1990s crash in the commercial property market, which contributed to the wider
economic downturn, was precipitated by rapid price and lending growth not dissimilar to that in evidence today. During this downturn, 25 of the so called ‘small
banks’ either closed or failed.2 And stresses in the commercial property sector have
also contributed to broader financial strains in other countries for example in the US
in the early 1990s and more recently in Japan.
2

See A Logan “The early 1990s small banks crisis: leading indicators. Bank of England Financial
Stability Review December 2000.

3
3

As you know, current market conditions are very buoyant, with recent returns

substantially higher than the long term average and defaults on commercial mortgages
infrequent. Given the historical experience, it is valuable to stand back and consider
whether such buoyant conditions are leading to an increase in risks which could
trigger a rapid change in market sentiment and broader financial strain at some point.
4

At the Bank we focus on achieving monetary stability and financial stability,

which together constitute our two so-called ‘Core Purposes’. The achievement of
monetary stability centres around the setting of interest rates on a monthly basis by
the Monetary Policy Committee in order to meet the inflation target set by the
Chancellor. And with our colleagues at HM Treasury and the FSA we work to
maintain financial stability through the tripartite Standing Committee on Financial
Stability.
5

The setting of monetary policy is necessarily forward-looking given the speed

with which changes in interest rates impact on the economy. So it is expectations of
how the macroeconomic environment will look in the medium term that determine
current interest rates. And the macroeconomic outlook is relatively benign at present.
6

Within our financial stability remit we focus primarily on downside risks. In

particular, we look for whether there are vulnerabilities or weak points in the financial
system that could, in unlikely but nonetheless plausible circumstances, generate
serious disruption to either financial markets or to the financial system more broadly,
with potentially widespread economic costs. In addition to improving the tripartite
Standing Committee’s knowledge of these risks, we hope, through publications such
as the Bank’s regular Financial Stability Report, to help financial firms and the wider
public in managing and preparing for these risks. Where appropriate, we work with
the FSA, HMT and other authorities to improve the robustness and resilience of the
UK financial system. And we also work on strengthening contingency planning and
crisis management arrangements in preparation for the worst, should it occur.
7

As I mentioned earlier, commercial property has proved a source of instability in

the past and is an area we monitor closely. Chart 1 shows the volatility of price
movements in the past and also highlights recent rapid rates of price growth (close to
15% annually in nominal terms), which have not been accompanied by a coincident

4
increase in rental growth. Indeed the pace of price appreciation recently has driven
yields to an historic low of 5.5%, almost half the level witnessed in the early 1990s
(Chart 2). And, though the quantity of city office developments has fallen over the
past three years, the quantity of development in the pipeline for the next three years is
considerably higher (Chart 3), but still below the level seen during the late 1980s /
early 1990s.
8

While the sustainability of these trends is of natural concern to those active in the

commercial property sector, the apparently exaggerated buoyancy of the market
would not be viewed as a potential source of risk to the UK financial system as a
whole if the market were small in financial terms. But as we know, this is not the
case. UK banks’ lending to the commercial property sector has risen rapidly in recent
years, increasing by more than 15% during the past year and quadrupling since 1997.
The sector now accounts for over a third of lending to private non-financial
companies (or PNFCs), twice the proportion of seven years ago (Chart 4). And
property is also an important asset class for pension funds, insurance companies and
other investors. So the fortunes of both investors and lenders have become more
closely intertwined with the fortunes of the property sector over the recent past.
9

Of course, the key question from a financial stability perspective is ‘how likely is

a market correction?’ In order to answer this question it is necessary to understand
the forces behind recent market developments.
10 The past few years have seen large increases in asset prices in a number of
markets. As discussed in our most recent Financial Stability Report, this may partly
reflect a manifestation of the generalised ‘search for yield’ in the face of low interest
rates and wider macroeconomic and monetary stability. The increase in the quantity
of money being invested in markets in search of higher returns has acted as a catalyst
for financial innovation, evidenced by rapid growth in securitisation activity and in
structured credit markets more generally. From a financial stability perspective, the
broadening of the investor base both domestically and internationally associated with
the development of new credit transfer products and the introduction of increasingly
sophisticated investment vehicles has resulted in a beneficial diversification of risk.
A good example are real estate investment trusts, or REITs, whose securities are
bought and sold on the major exchanges and therefore provide an accessible, liquid,

5
property investment instrument. By extending commercial property investment
opportunities to a much larger community of investors, whilst simultaneously
minimising the concentration of exposures to individual investments and increasing
trading opportunities, the introduction of REITs can be seen as a positive
development from a financial stability perspective. And these structural
developments, which have widened the investor base and increased commercial
property demand, also help to account for some of the increase in prices. Banks’ risk
management practices have also improved in recent years, with closer monitoring of
loans and greater use of stress testing. So a number of factors may have reduced the
likelihood of a sharp correction of the type experienced in the early 1990s.
11 That said, the extent to which recent trends have affected potential market
dynamics in the event of a rapid change in market sentiment is yet to be seen. For
example, the recent growth in securitisation activity within the commercial property
sector may have reduced the probability of stress on account of the associated
diversification in risk, but if strain in the sector were to occur then uncertainty over
where the underlying credit exposures actually lie, and how ‘new’ investors will
behave if their tranches are downgraded and/or they suffer credit losses, could make it
more difficult to resolve.
12 And there are questions as to whether the generalised ‘search for yield’ has gone
too far and led to a potential under-pricing of risk in some asset markets. Certainly it
is doubtful whether the structural changes described above can explain all of the
recent increases in price growth, which have led to valuations becoming stretched in
relation to their traditional determinants. The dividend discount asset
pricing model provides one decomposition of the factors behind the increase in the
rate of growth of capital values. As shown in Chart 5, the compression in our
estimate of the risk premium has been one important factor. Another has been the
fall in the discount rate: over the past year, the 10-year real government bond yield
has fallen to its lowest level since index-linked gilts were first issued 25 years ago.
And these trends may be partly related: low bond yields have encouraged investors
seeking a given nominal return to invest in riskier assets – including property –
driving up their price. Although the model is simplistic and has clear limitations, the

6
analysis also suggests that property prices could be at risk if bond yields were to rise
and/or investors’ risk appetite to fall significantly.
13 From a risk management perspective, the potential for a sharp adjustment should
not be overlooked. Not least because fortunes within the commercial property sector
can rapidly reverse, as I am sure you are all too aware. This is demonstrated by the
fact that the fraction of quoted property companies making a loss rose from zero to
almost 30% between 1988 and 1992. And whilst the risk environment is clearly
different now to then, it is important not to ignore the lessons of economic history.
This is particularly important in a market such as commercial property, as experience
of past episodes of stress in the sector becomes increasingly limited among active
market professionals and anecdotal evidence tells us that new investors may be
tending to over-extrapolate recent trends. Although unlikely, it is prudent to be
prepared for severe adverse shocks either to the macro-economy or to financial
markets. These could trigger a sharp change in market sentiment and involve an
abrupt end to the ‘search for yield’ phenomenon mentioned above. This in turn could
lead to a marked change in financing conditions, with commensurate falls in property
prices and difficulties in refinancing. The accompanying reduction in risk appetite
would tend to result in a rapid widening of credit spreads and reduce the liquidity of
some new capital instruments. By way of example, it is worth noting that US CMBS
spreads jumped by more than 90bp in the two months following the announcement of
LTCM’s failure in September 1998.
14 Again, I wish to emphasise that such a scenario is improbable and does not reflect
our beliefs about the most likely outcome for the commercial property sector. But it
is sensible to consider adverse outcomes and to stress test portfolios when managing
risk exposures.
15 Clearly the world has changed somewhat since we last witnessed significant stress
in the commercial property sector. The main developments – greater macro-economic
stability, and innovation to improve the capacity to manage, hedge and diversify risks
should I believe be viewed in a positive light from a financial stability perspective.
And as I outlined earlier, the central macroeconomic outlook is benign at present,
with risks on both sides broadly balanced. Nonetheless, the exceptional buoyancy of
recent conditions in commercial property markets and the associated rise in leverage

7
do suggest some build up in vulnerabilities, and so warrant careful risk management
by market professionals.
Chart 1: Commercial property price growth,
1971-20063
Per cent
Commercial property price growth
Real commercial property price growth

Chart 2: Equivalent yield and annual rental
growth, 1987-2006
Per cent
25

40

Equivalent yield
Annual rental growth

30

20

20

15

10
+
0
10

10
5
+
0
-

20

5

30

10

40
71

76

81

86

91

96

01

15
87

90

93

96

99

02

05

Source: Investment Property Databank and Bank
calculations

Source: Investment Property Databank

Chart 3: Development pipeline – city
offices, 1984-2009

Chart 4: UK banks’ lending to the
commercial property sector, 1997-2006

Completed
Square feet (thousands)
Under construction (let)
Under construction (unlet)
Planned but not started
Take-up
6,000

£bn
160

Per cent

40

Level (LHS)

140

35

As % of lending to
PNFCs (RHS)

120

30

5,000

100

25

80

20

60

15

2,000

40

10

1,000

20

5

4,000
3,000

0
84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08

Source: CB Richard Ellis

3

0

0
97

98

99

00

01

02

03

04

05

Source: Bank calculations

A measure of real commercial property prices is obtained by dividing the IPD All property capital
values index by the GDP price deflator.

06

8

Chart 5: Dividend discount model
decomposition of commercial property price
growth, 2000-2006
Percentage points
Implied risk premium
25
10 year government bond yields
Short run rental growth expectations
20
Rental values
Capital values growth
15
10
5
+
0
5
10
15
00

01

02

03

04

05

06

Source: Investment Property Databank, Investment
Property Forum and Bank calculations

ENDS

