Concluding Remarks on the Royal Economic Society Public
Lecture 2008
Speech given by
Timothy Besley, Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England

At the Royal Institution, London
18 November 2008

Background paper

The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of England or other
members of the Monetary Policy Committee.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

In this lecture so far, I have reviewed the historical experience of inflation in the UK
and changes in economic thinking that lead up to the adoption of the current
framework for the conduct of monetary policy. 1 In conclusion, I will turn to some of
the more recent experience.

The period between 1997 and 2007 has often been referred to as the Great Stability.
Inflation in the UK was low and stable, especially by the standards of the previous
twenty years. Only once before the summer of 2007 had inflation diverged more than
1 percentage point from the target, triggering an open letter to the Chancellor. In a
much-discussed article, my colleague on the MPC, Charlie Bean, had noted that on
the basis of past history, inflation was likely to be more than 1 percentage point away
from the target around 40% of the time 2 .

But since August 2007, the MPC has been dealing with the fall-out of the credit
crunch. At the same time, there has been a remarkable degree of volatility in global
energy and commodity markets. Increases in these prices drove CPI inflation above
the 2% target this year and inflation was at 5.2% in September – the highest level for
more than ten years. The threat of persistent inflation led the MPC to be reluctant to
cut Bank Rate before clear evidence that inflationary forces were moderating. In
today’s ONS release, annual CPI inflation was 4.5% in October.

Since the summer, however, the outlook for global commodity prices has changed
rapidly. For example, the oil futures curve, which was used in the August Inflation
Report projections, suggested that oil would remain at $120 per barrel for the
reminder of the year. The current oil price is now below $55 dollars per barrel.
These global price developments (assuming that they are sustained) mean that
inflation is likely to fall below target next year, notwithstanding the upward pressure
on inflation from the continued fall in the value of the pound.

1

This discussion was based on the background to this lecture paper co-authored with Neil Meads and
Paolo Surico available at
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2008/speech366background.pdf.
2
Bean, C (1998), ‘The new UK monetary arrangements: a view from the literature’, Economic Journal,
Vol.108, Issue 451, pages 1,795-809.

2

The failure of Lehman Brothers in mid-September set in train a series of events in
financial markets which led to a number of major policy packages announced on
8 October. The centrepiece of these initiatives is a plan to recapitalize UK banks in
order to strengthen their balance sheets and to mitigate the impact of the financial
crisis for lending to households and businesses. Also in October, the MPC
participated in a coordinated action with other leading central banks to lower interest
rates by 0.5%.

The projections for growth and inflation published in the November Inflation Report,
which was published last week, reflected the news since August. With these
projections in hand, the MPC decided to lower Bank Rate by a further 1.5% at its last
meeting in November - the largest single change in Bank Rate since the current
monetary policy arrangements were put in place. As the minutes are due out
tomorrow, I cannot comment any further on the reasoning behind that decision or
disclose my vote at the meeting.

There is little doubt that the recent period has constituted the biggest policy challenge
that the MPC has faced since its inception in 1997. And, not surprisingly, there has
been much debate around the decision – both the size of the cut and its timing.

I want to emphasise two main points that fit closely with my discussion of the broader
context that I laid out earlier in my lecture.

First, the best way to understand this decision is in terms of our mandate to target CPI
inflation. As the projections in the November Inflation Report show, the move in
Bank Rate in November can be justified by the outlook for inflation. It is essential, in
my view, that monetary policy decisions remain focused on our inflation targeting
mandate.

Second, this decision was based on an independent judgement of the MPC using its
normal process of deliberation and decision making. From an institutional
perspective, the arrangements in place have shown themselves to be remarkably
robust during this testing time. This is essential for the long-term effectiveness of the
framework.
3

So why did the pundits and commentators fail to predict the behaviour of the MPC in
November? After all, the data that we based our projections on are in the public
domain. One possibility is the obsession with describing the composition of MPC in
terms of personalities and labels like “hawk” and “dove”. As I am sure you all
appreciate, these constitute a distraction from what really matters – the nature of the
economic arguments and how they shape the outlook for inflation. It also seems
likely that too much weight was put on the past decisions of the MPC which has
generally moved Bank Rate in small steps. However, this was a reflection of the
pattern of news in the data rather than a binding convention.

The challenges that the MPC face remain daunting. The outlook is particularly
uncertain as we try to assess how quickly normal conditions in financial markets are
restored. Many have argued, myself included,3 that the transmission mechanism for
monetary policy is impaired due to conditions in credit markets. However, there are
grounds to expect that financial market policies will help to restore things to
normality in due course. Alongside the adjustments in financial markets, we have a
wider rebalancing of the UK economy as households rebuild their savings, house
prices find their new sustainable level and the current account deficit narrows.

In the next phase of the policy debate, there will be renewed discussion around how
monetary policy might respond to future imbalances in the UK economy. This will
likely include a debate about how to have a better measure of housing costs in our
target measure. But we know that there is no simple fix. There will also be
discussion around more direct measures to restrict leverage in financial markets and to
curb excessive borrowing by some households. However, the latter fall outside the
domain of monetary policy as it is conventionally viewed. Hence, it is moot whether
such measures should be the responsibility of the MPC.

I outlined earlier in my lecture, the logic behind the monetary policy arrangements put
in place in 1997. That logic remains as valid today as it did at the time. Institutional
change is a slow process and it is impossible to appreciate fully how institutions will

3

See Besley, T., (2008) ‘Some Current Issues in UK Monetary Policy.’

4

work until they have been tested under all conditions. In an ever evolving world, I am
certain that there will be fresh challenges ahead for present and future members of the
MPC. These include making sure that fiscal and monetary policy work together
coherently together to meet economic challenges.

The current monetary policy arrangements were fashioned in response to previous
periods of economic turmoil and the challenges that these posed to economic
management. The strength of the current framework remains the fact that the MPC
makes independent monthly decisions based on economic judgements in light of the
data and economic analysis to achieve a clearly defined target. In my view, this
remains the best hope to make monetary policy work now and in the future.

5

