Slack and the labour market
Speech given by
Martin Weale, External Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England

Thames Valley Chamber of Commerce, Windsor
Thursday 20 March 2014

I would like to thank Nicholas Fawcett and Tomas Key for research assistance. I am also grateful to
Maria Barriel, Stuart Berry, David Copple, Matthew Corder, Spencer Dale, Rob Elder, Philip King,
Brad Speigner and Srdan Tatomir for helpful comments, and to Rebecca Burnham for assistance with
data. The views expressed here are my own, and may differ from those held by my colleagues at the
Bank of England or other members of the Monetary Policy Committee.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Introduction

Very many thanks for coming here today. The past six months have seen good news about the economy.
Inflation – which the Monetary Policy Committee has the job of keeping close to the target of two per cent – now
stands at 1.9%, the lowest rate since 2009. Output has been rising; and employment rose by nearly 400,000 in
2013. The unemployment rate for the three months to January was 7.2%, far lower than the MPC – and many
others – predicted in summer last year.

But, just as spring seems to have arrived early, after a prolonged spell of awful weather, we should not be too
quick to assume that the good weather will last. The outlook for inflation depends, in part on the degree to which
the economy can sustain continued increases in output and falls in unemployment, before inflationary pressures
begin to build.

Even though unemployment has fallen rapidly, wage inflation has remained exceptionally low and price inflation
has fallen sharply. This suggests that the slack in the economy has not been fully used up, and that there is,
over the next two or three years, room for the economy to grow by more than rising labour supply and
underlying productivity growth would, on their own allow. I would like to talk to you today about how much more
room there might be.

Inflation, the Output Gap and Spare Capacity

Many people find it helpful to produce an estimate of the output gap. For example the Office for Budget
Responsibility forms a view of the gap between “between the current level of activity in the economy and the
potential level it could sustain while keeping inflation stable” (Office for Budget Responsibility, 2011). They are
concerned about the long run potential of the economy and have to consider separately how fast any gap is
likely to close. The gap they identify aggregates spare capacity in firms and any deviation of unemployment
from its natural rate.
The MPC’s goal is, however, first and foremost achieving the Government’s inflation target, which it aims to do
over a two to three year horizon. So whether the concept of the output gap is useful in this task depends on
whether the different components of the output gap exert much the same influence on inflation over the next two
to three years or not. If a one per cent shortfall between actual output and potential output arising because
firms were operating below capacity had the same influence on inflation at two to three years as a one per cent
shortfall between actual output and potential output because of unemployment, then the two could be safely
added up. But if demand were thought to influence inflation mainly through the workings of the labour market,
then the key focus of the Committee would need to be on labour market conditions. The overall growth rate
would depend on the way in which spare capacity in firms was expected to move in line with demand; this would
matter for the Committee’s growth forecast but labour market conditions would offer the most appropriate guide
to policy.
2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2

This aggregation issue appears in a second guise. The evidence is that short-term unemployment exerts more
downward pressure on wage inflation than does long-term unemployment. Research suggests that it is not so
much the overall level of unemployment, or the extent to which it differs from the natural rate, as the difference
between actual unemployment and a level identified as the medium-term unemployment rate, which influences
inflation over the period of concern to the Bank.

This medium-run equilibrium, which Bank staff judge to lie between 6% and 6.5% at present, is affected by two
factors. One is the speed with which currently unemployed people are likely to find jobs, balanced against the
rate at which formerly employed people are losing theirs. These flows into and out of employment determine
where the unemployment rate is likely fall in the long run, once temporary shocks to the economy have
dissipated. The second is the proportion of long-term unemployed, defined as those who have spent more than
a year out of work. This is relevant because, following Layard, Nickell and Jackman (1991), we might expect
those who are long-term unemployed to be less connected to the labour market, and therefore exert less
downward pressure on wage growth than those who became unemployed more recently.

To these observations I should add an obvious point. Slack in the economy is a waste of resources. Our
subsidiary goal, of supporting “the economic policy of Her Majesty’s Government, including its objectives for
growth and employment” means that we have to consider what the degree of slack in the economy is and how
far we can reduce any slack without taking risks with inflation.

Given these considerations, I think that the sort of estimate of the output gap used by bodies such as the Office
for Budget Responsibility is not a great deal of help in the judgements that I have to make. I also need to stress
that, given the need to keep inflation close to target, I can take account of slack in firms and in the labour market
but also need to consider how far it has some bearing on the outlook for inflation. It is from this perspective that
I would like to describe, as best I can, the current state of slack in the economy.

I will first discuss spare capacity in firms; I will then consider unemployment, and will finally focus on
underemployment, the phenomenon whereby there is an excess of people in employment wanting to increase
their working hours relative to those wanting to reduce their working hours.

Underpinning my analysis of unemployment and underemployment is the issue of how far a given change in
labour input might translate into a change in GDP. Two questions are relevant. First, how does the extra labour
which might be employed compare with “average” labour already in employment. I make comparisons on the
basis of the likely rates of pay of this extra labour as compared to the average. This provides an estimate of the
likely change in effective labour input, which adjusts the extra labour that may be employed for differences in the
number of hours worked, and productivity, compared with those already in work. Having done this separately
for unemployment and underemployment, I pull my results together by making an assumption about how the
increase in effective labour input feeds through into an increase in output.

3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

3

Slack in Firms

The Committee tends to use indicators of capacity utilisation to draw inferences about slack in firms; three such
measures are shown in Figure 1. Although all pointed to some degree of spare capacity during the financial
crisis, the more recent picture is mixed, with two surveys – the BCC and CBI measures – reporting that on
average, firms are currently working above normal capacity levels. Meanwhile, the Bank’s regional agents
report that many firms are operating below to normal. On balance I am happy with a judgement that firms are,
broadly speaking, producing at their normal level of output. Thus the issue I raised above, about how slack in
firms influences inflation, is largely irrelevant at the present time. In order to consider how far output can
expand relative to supply while inflation remains close to target I therefore turn to look at circumstances in the
labour market and initially at unemployment.

Unemployment and slack
The UK’s headline unemployment rate stood, in the
Figure 1: Survey indicators of capacity utilisation

fourth quarter of 2013, at 7.2 per cent while the Bank’s
estimate of the medium-term unemployment rate lies
between 6 and 6 ½ per cent. I use the middle of that
range. If the entire gap between headline unemployment
and the medium-run equilibrium – currently around one
per cent – were translated into an increase in
employment, how would effective labour input change?
A very simple calculation would be based on the
assumption that all labour is equivalent. If hours worked
increase by one per cent, then effective labour input
increases by one per cent. But how far is this true? How
do the earnings of people who have been recently
unemployed compare with those of the rest of the labour

Source: February 2014 Inflation Report.
Note: Three measures are produced by weighting together
surveys from the Bank’s Agents (manufacturing and services),

force? A summary answer to this can be seen in Table
11. This table shows the average hourly wage rates and

the BCC (non-services and services) and the CBI

the number of hours worked as reported by a sample of

(manufacturing, financial services, business/consumer services

people in the Labour Force Survey, as a function of what

and distributive trades) using nominal shares in value added.

they were doing a year earlier.

The BCC data are not seasonally adjusted.

The data on activity one year earlier are collected in the survey only in the second quarter of each year, which is
why these data relate to 2013Q2.

The data show that those who had been in work a year earlier, earned slightly more than the average wage. In
contrast, those who entered or re-entered employment in nearly all cases earned less than the average.
4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

4

People who had been unemployed one year earlier earned only sixty per cent of the average and also faced a
working week about fifteen per cent shorter. It is not possible to say from these data, how long such effects are
likely to persist. But a large body of academic work (e.g. Arulampalam (2001) and Gregory and Jukes (2001))
suggests, at the very least, that only the most fortunate of the formerly unemployed will find themselves earning
close to the average wage rate after a further year of employment.

Table 1: Hourly Rates of Pay and Weekly Hours Worked in 2013Q2

Activity twelve months earlier:

Pay

Hours

Head-count
(thousands)

(1)

Working in paid job or business

£ 13.61

33.1

22,497

Laid off, short time at firm

£ 10.31

32.6

18

Unemployed, actively seeking work

£ 7.92

28.0

600

Special government scheme

£ 6.94

25.5

10

Unpaid work for self or relative

£ 8.71

18.0

43

Full time student

£ 7.50

22.1

734

Looking after family or home

£ 10.61

18.4

222

Temporarily sick or injured

£ 8.92

20.9

54

Long term sick or disabled

£ 11.08

12.2

48

Retired

£ 12.72

12.2

60

None of these

£ 12.45

27.9

263

£ 13.24

32.3

Average
Source: Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations.

(1) The population weighted number of individuals who are employed in 2013Q2 and who provide a
response to the question.

A standard assumption in economics is that the best measure we have of the productivity of each different type
of labour is the rate at which it is paid. This is, of course, not at all the same thing as claiming that people are
always worth what they’re paid; furthermore Lazear and Rosen (1981) have identified circumstances where
businesses may depart from this, not for specific individuals but as a general principle. Nevertheless if we
follow the standard approach, the implication is very clear. Combining the fact that those who were unemployed
work fewer hours and earn less pay than the average – when they do find work – I find that their equivalent
labour input is only around half of the figure which would be inferred just from studying the total number of
people employed.

While it is not the main focus of this talk, it is worth noting that the low wages are not solely the result of having
previously been unemployed. Forty per cent of the people taking up work were aged under thirty, and it is well
known that, as Table 2 shows, young workers are paid appreciably less than the average of the population.
This explains much of the difference in earnings between those who were formerly unemployed and the
average.
5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

5

Table 2: Age and Hourly Pay in 2013Q2
Age range:
16-19yrs

£ 5.72

20-24yrs

£ 8.18

25-29yrs

£ 11.12

30-34yrs

£ 13.36

Average

£ 13.24

Source: Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations

Underemployment

A recent study by Bell and Blanchflower (2013) drew attention to the fact that a substantial imbalance has
developed between those who say they would like to work longer than they do, and those who would like to
reduce their working hours, even at the cost of lower pay. Earlier work by Stewart and Swaffield (1997) found
that a third of manual workers would have preferred to work fewer hours at the wage rate they were paid. Table
3C of the February Inflation Report, reproduced below and updated to include the Q4 figure, summarises the
present imbalance, showing the difference between the hours that people actually work and the hours that they
would like to work, suggesting a rather different situation.

Table 3: Actual Hours Worked and Desired Hours of People Employed
1998-2007

2011

2012

2013
Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Average Hours

32.4

31.6

31.9

32

32

32.1

32.1

Desired Hours

32.1

32.1

32.4

32.7

32.6

32.7

32.6

Source: Inflation Report February 2014, p.29, Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations. The figure for 2013Q2 differs from that of Table
1 because these data are compiled from a slightly different sample.

It is obviously tempting to look at these figures and regard the gap between actual hours and desired hours as a
simple additional source of labour market slack. On that basis it might seem that hours worked could rise by
around 1½ per cent, simply as a result of people finding as much work to do as they would like to do. There
are, however, grounds for caution, even before those figures are translated into effective labour supply.

First of all, it is important to remember that the MPC is concerned about keeping inflation close to target.
Without evidence on how the gap between actual and desired hours influences wage inflation, it is not possible
to come to firm conclusions about how far it is possible for it to fall as the economy recovers. It may be the case
that some of the net underemployment is a response to the state of the economy rather than any indication of
genuine extra capacity. For example people whose partners lose their jobs may well say that they would like to
work longer. But once their partners find new jobs, they may lose interest in doing so. This is consistent with
the observations of Benito and Saleheen (2013) who find that people increase their hours of work in response to
6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

6

financial shocks, and the analysis of Attanasio, Low and Sanchez-Marcos (2005) which suggested that female
labour supply could vary in response to shocks to household income.

I am afraid I cannot address all the interesting issues raised by underemployment. I would, however, like to
scratch below the surface and set out what we do know about net underemployment, coming to some
conclusions about what the implications might be for output if the imbalance between actual and desired hours
were resolved. The source for this is the Labour Force Survey; those of you who, like myself, have contributed
to its data will know that respondents are contacted five times at intervals of approximately three months. My
main focus will be on looking at people who were working less (or more) than their desired hours in the first
wave of the survey, to see what happened to them four quarters later. In order to build up a reasonably large
sample I look at all the people who answered the survey for the first time in 2012 and for the fifth time in 2013. I
begin, however, with a simple analysis of under and overemployment (which could jointly be described as
misemployment) in the final quarter of 2013 as a function of age. This is shown in Figure 2, and is of
considerable interest in its own right. Stakhanovite young people are keen to work more, while old people,
perhaps squeezed by the need to find time to care for elderly parents, want to reduce their working hours.

What happens to people who would like to increase their working hours? As I noted, an analysis of initial and
final responses to the Labour Force Survey makes it possible to explore this. A degree of caution is called for,
however.

There are issues of selection bias. People who respond to sample surveys are never as assiduous as
statisticians and economists making use of the data would like them to be. So only about sixty per cent of those
Figure 2: Numbers of employed people wanting longer hours

in the survey at the start are still
there five quarters later.

(underemployed) and shorter hours (overemployed): % of

Furthermore the people most likely to

employed population in each age group. 2013Q4

drop out are young people and those
30%

25%

20%

who are not very well educated.
These are exactly those most likely
to want to work extra hours. I can
correct for this to some extent, by

15%

10%

estimating how the probability of
dropping out depends on age and
education, and adjusting the

5%

0%
16-19 20-24 25-29 30-34 35-39 40-44 45-49 50-54 55-59 60-64 65-69
Underemployed

Overemployed

Source: Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations

importance given to each
observation in the light of this

70+

(Wooldridge, 2002). Other things
equal, people with a low chance of
staying in are given enhanced

7

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

7

importance if they do stay in. But there still seem to be too many over-employed people relative to
underemployed people. Adjusting for survey attrition can take us only so far.

For those who have, in the past, said that they were over or underemployed, and whom I describe as
misemployed, an obvious question is how far they needed to change their working patterns in practice, in order
to feel fully employed instead. The rows highlighted in red in Table 4 shows the amounts by which people who
were misemployed said that they wanted to change their working week.
Table 4: Desired and Actual Changes in Hours Worked between 2012 and 2013

in 2013

Labour market status

Labour market status in 2012
Under-

Fully

Over-

employed

employed

employed

13.5

0.0

-8.3

1.2

-2.9

10.0

11.7

0.0

-11.3

Under-

Desired change

employed

Actual change

Fully

Desired change

employed

Actual change

6.5

-0.5

-4.0

Over-

Desired change

9.7

0.0

-11.3

employed

Actual change

7.1

1.4

-1.5

Note: A negative number indicates people wanted to, or did, reduce their working hours. For
each of the three labour market states, two figures are reported: in the upper row in red, how
much on average, people in that group wanted to change their hours when asked in 2012; and in
the lower row in blue, the actual change in their working hours between 2012 and 2013. The top
right and bottom left cells are in grey to reflect the small sample size of respondents in these
categories, compared to the other groups.
Source: Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations.

People who were underemployed said, on average, that they wanted to work an extra twelve or thirteen hours.
Those who were overemployed said that they wanted to cut back by an average of around eleven hours. Very
few people moved from underemployment to overemployment or vice versa; the figures shown in these parts of
the table are not of any importance.

These desired changes in hours can be compared with actual changes in hours. The blue rows in Table 4 show
the hours worked by people in all possible combinations of employment in 2012 and 2013. If we look at people
who were misemployed in 2012 but fully employed in 2013, we can compare the changes in actual hours with
the desired changes reported above them.

Here we see that the people who were underemployed in 2012 but fully employed in 2013 increased their
working week by, on average 6.5 hours. This compares with the 11.7 extra hours that they said they wanted to
8

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

8

work. But the mismatch between what people say they want and what they settle for is much greater among
those who saw themselves as overemployed in 2012. This group said they wanted to cut their working week by
just over eleven hours. A year later a reduction of only four hours had kept them happy.

Nothing of course is certain, but in interpreting the figures of under and overemployment, rather than take what
people say at its face value, it seems sensible to me to use the adjustments given in Table 4 as an indicator of
the average amount that someone who claims to be misemployed actually wants to alter their working week.
This obviously writes down overemployment much more than it writes down underemployment and has the
effect of making the degree of net spare capacity bigger.

When we adjust for the relative productivity of the different groups, using relative wages as a measure,
however, it is underemployment which is written down rather more than overemployment. It is not clear why
those who remained underemployed earned less than those who became fully employed. But, for the latter
group, we can see that they earned appreciably less than the people who were fully employed in both quarters.
So, too, did the people who were fully employed in 2012 but were underemployed a year later. Conversely the
people who were overemployed tended to be paid more than those who were fully employed.

Table 5 shows average rates of pay between 2012 and 2013 for the sub-group of people for whom we have
1

wage data in both periods .

It is not clear why those who remained underemployed earned less than those who became fully employed.
But, for the latter group, we can see that they earned appreciably less than the people who were fully employed
in both quarters. So, too, did the people who were fully employed in 2012 but were underemployed a year later.
Conversely the people who were overemployed tended to be paid more than those who were fully employed.

1

If the transition from underemployment to being fully employed led to a pay rise it would be necessary also to take into
account the implied increase in productivity. The hourly pay for people underemployed in 2012 and fully employed in 2013
was, however, £9.40 in 2012 and £9.58 in 2013 (2013Q4 £s). I have assumed that these differences arise from sampling
rather than underlying differences.
9

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

9

Table 5: Hourly Rates of Pay by Employment Category (2013Q4 prices)
Labour market status in 2012
Under-

Fully

Over-

employed

employed

employed

£ 8.74

£ 10.09

£ 12.65

£ 9.49

£ 13.94

£ 16.16

£ 10.96

£ 15.42

£ 17.24

Employed
In 2013

Labour market status

Under-

Fully
Employed
OverEmployed

Source: Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations.

In the first instance, we might, therefore, take the middle row of the table as an indication of the relative
productivity of those who seem themselves as under and overemployed. Comparing a wage of £9.49 to £13.94,
this suggests that underemployed people have a productivity of 68% of the average. But comparing £16.16 to
£13.94 implies that those who are overemployed have a productivity of 116% of the average worker. So, to
take account of these figures when working out the degree of spare capacity, we need to multiply the number of
extra hours we expect from underemployed people by 0.68, while we need to multiply what we expect from
overemployed people by 1.16.

The Dynamics of Under and Overemployment

I mentioned earlier that I have so far not found evidence that net underemployment influences wage
determination. This means that, without some sense of the factors which drive net underemployment over time,
it is not possible to say how this might change in response to rising overall demand. At present all I can do is
give some indication of the dynamics of under and overemployment.

Table 6 shows what people were doing in 2013 as a function of the way in which they described themselves a
year earlier. I have included here not just the three categories of employment, but also whether people were
inactive- meaning that they were neither working nor looking for work- or unemployed, meaning that they were
actively looking for work. I have also distinguished those who, in 2013, report a new job within the last twelve
months from those who do not.

There are some oddities of the data such as the fact that some of those who moved from being out of work in
2012 to being in work in 2013, still say that they have been in their jobs for more than twelve months. This may
in fact be true because the interview dates, in the nature of things, may be slightly less than twelve months

10

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

10

apart. But there may also be an element of reporting or recording error. Anyway, these are unlikely to be
sufficiently frequent so as to make the overall message unreliable.
Of the people who were inactive in 2012, one in six of those who found work regarded themselves as
underemployed. The proportion of formerly unemployed people who regarded themselves as underemployed is
slightly higher. Very few people previously not working see themselves, however, as overemployed. That
suggests that people previously not working who start work tend to be keen to work rather than resent it as an
imposition that eats into their leisure.

Table 6: Activity in 2013 as a Function of Activity in 2012 (People aged Sixteen or
over)
Activity in 2012
Age 15

Inactive

Unemployed

Under-

Fully Employed

Overemployed

employed

Activity in 2013

Number in 2012:

Old job

New
job

841,161

19,214,863

2,310,772

2,305,485

23,315,368

1,628,769

Inactive

72%

90%

18%

4%

4%

4%

Unemployed

13%

3%

39%

3%

2%

2%

Underemployed

1%

0%

2%

36%

6%

2%

Fully Employed

4%

2%

7%

42%

74%

48%

Overemployed

0%

0%

0%

1%

6%

37%

Underemployed

2%

1%

10%

4%

1%

1%

Fully Employed

9%

3%

22%

9%

6%

5%

Overemployed

0%

0%

1%

0%

0%

1%

Source: Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations.

The chance of someone stopping working does not depend very much on whether they were misemployed or
not. Those who have been inactive or unemployed in the past have quite high chances of being underemployed
if they do start work. Nevertheless the main “entry” into underemployment is from being fully employed; the table
suggests, overall, a seven per cent risk of becoming underemployed in such circumstances.

In contrast, just over two fifths of those previously underemployed now regard themselves as fully employed
without any change of job, while a further nine per cent regard themselves as fully employed after a change of
job. The chance of someone underemployed changing their job is nearly twice that of someone who is fully
employed. Overall, more than half of the people who initially reported themselves as underemployed are not
underemployed a year later. This proportion is just over sixty per cent for overemployment. Once again the
main way out of this does not involve a change of job. Six per cent of those previously overemployed do,
however, escape from this through a change of job.

11

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

11

So the exit rates from both underemployment and overemployment are high. My guess is that it is likely to be
fluctuations in entry rates which are the main drivers of both over and underemployment. I am afraid I cannot,
at present, offer any analysis of these – this will have to wait for an investigation of the way in which entry and
exit rates have changed over time. But I would certainly caution against the assumption that normalisation of
the labour market necessarily means that the pattern of entry and exit rates will necessarily revert to those
which kept under and overemployment in balance in the period before the crisis. As I mentioned earlier, it is
perfectly possible to think of both entry and exit rates as being driven, at least to some extent, by
unemployment.
Slack in the Labour Market and Slack in the Economy

What does this all mean for an estimate of overall slack in the labour market and, by extension, the economy? I
can bring these pieces together to give some estimate of the extent to which there is slack in the labour market
which can be used up while maintaining inflationary pressures consistent with keeping inflation close to target
over the two to three year horizon on which the MPC focuses. These calculations are made on two untested
assumptions. First, that net underemployment is all available as “spare” labour, after adjustment for the
difference between reported desired changes to hours worked and the actual changes which are sufficient to
leave people fully employed. Secondly, the entry and exit dynamics are such that it can be reduced to zero over
the same sort of time-scale as unemployment falls back. The calculations are presented in Table 7.

12

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

12

Table 7: Slack in the Labour Market 2013Q4
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Number of

Hours per

Adjustment for

Effective

people

person per

actual/desired

Adjustment for

hours

(thousands)

week

hours

relative pay

(millions)

Employment:
People working

30,146

32.1

966.8

Unemployment:
People Unemployed

2,342

Medium-term equilibrium

2,031

Difference

312

28.0

Desire extra hours

3,381

12.2

Desire reduced hours

2,153

-11.5

0.60

5.2

0.56

0.68

15.8

0.35

1.16

-10.0

Underemployment:

11.0

Total increase in effective hours
Per cent of actual hours

1.1%

x 0.8 to give impact on GDP

0.9%

Source: Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations.



Column 1 shows the starting point for the calculations, based on an assessment of the labour market in
the fourth quarter of last year. The figures for unemployed and medium-term equilibrium unemployed
are presented in thousands of people.



Column 2 relates to average hours worked per week. The first entry – 32.1 – is just the average length
of a working week for those in work in 2013Q4. The second is the average length of week for those
who were unemployed a year earlier, but manage to find work. And the final two numbers, 12.2 and
-11.5 show, respectively, the desired increase or decrease in hours, for those who said they weren’t
happy with how much they were currently working.



Column 3 shows the change in hours of those who moved from being misemployed to being fully
employed, as a fraction of the change they had said they wanted.



Column 4 shows the rate of pay of the people concerned relative to the average hourly rate for the
economy as a whole.



The entries in column 5 are computed by multiplying those in column 1 by those in columns 2, 3 and 4,
with overall labour market slack being shown as the sum of these.

This result is shown in units of effective labour. An increase in effective labour input of one per cent should be
expected to increase output by less than one per cent because output is the result of joint inputs of capital and

13

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

13

labour; an increase as large as one per cent would be expected to result only if the capital stock were
increased in line with the increase in labour input.

The conventional way of estimating the increase in output associated with a one per cent increase in labour
input is to multiply it by the share of output which accrues to labour rather than being taken up in either
depreciation or the return to capital. The most recent figures (for 2012) put this at 0.66. However analysis at
the Bank suggests that the underlying contribution of labour is slightly higher than this at around 0.8, and
multiplying by this might give a better sense of the possible contribution that increased labour input could make
to output without running into inflationary pressure. After taking this into account I come up with a best estimate
of slack of 0.9 per cent of GDP

Errors, Omissions etc.

In the discussion above I have focused on the extra labour which might become available if unemployment were
to fall and if net underemployment were also to be reduced. These are, of course, not the only means by which
employment might grow. The working-age population is expected to grow by two and a quarter per cent
between the June of 2013 and June of 2016. Such growth is normally regarded as something quite distinct from
labour market slack.

It is also possible that employment as a proportion of the population of working age, the participation ratio, will
rise. Figure 3 shows the recent behaviour of this

Figure 3: Labour participation

proportion; it is clear that different approaches to
Per cent of 16+ population

63.8
63.6
63.4
63.2
63

forecasting would give rather different answers about
how this might be expected to move over the next
two to three years. One could take the view that
there will be a further upward movement, perhaps
supported by the fact that people who in the past did
not make adequate provision for their retirement are

62.8
62.6
62.4
2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

62.2
2014

Note: Figure shows total employment as a share of the 16+
population. Figure for 2014 represents Bank staff projection.

increasingly working beyond the traditional
retirement age. The government’s benefit policies
are intended to increase the participation of people
of traditional working age; perhaps some impact
should be assumed from these. Or one could take
the view that the high figures in 2006 represent
something of a cyclical peak, and that, particularly if

living standards start to rise again, participation may not rise any further. The Inflation Report has built in the
assumption of a modest further rise and – whether or not it is appropriate to call this labour market slack – it is
clear that if it materialises, supply will rise by more than if it does not. That is one upward factor built in to the
Inflation Report figures absent from my calculations above.
14

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

14

Pointing in the other direction, however, is the fact that I have assumed that all of the net underemployment,
after correcting for the differences between what people say, and what they do, is available as extra labour. This
may not turn out to be the case if net underemployment has very little influence on pay bargaining. In those
circumstances a fall in unemployment to below the medium term equilibrium rate could raise inflationary
pressures even while net unemployment remains.

A second factor, which might also reduce the impact of net underemployment as currently measured, is the
possibility that it is, at least in part, a consequence of current levels of unemployment. As people whose
partners are currently unemployment find jobs, their own interest in working longer hours may decline even
though their own circumstances have not changed. Yet a third possibility is that the rise in net underemployment
since 2008 is a consequence of some structural change in the labour market; in other words that the increase
reflects a change in the natural rate of underemployment rather than an amount of labour which can be made
available to meet an increase in demand for labour.

Uncertainty also surrounds the medium-term equilibrium unemployment rate. It is perfectly possible that this is
lower, or higher, than the figure I have used.

Yet another issue concerns self-employment. This has risen very sharply, and particularly so in the last three
months of 2013, when the number of people describing themselves as self-employed rose by 172,000, or
4.1 per cent of the figure for the previous quarter. It is possible that self-employment is concealed
unemployment and is therefore labour which might be better used with different employment arrangements. It is,
however, the case that it is disproportionately old people who become self-employed; if this is a choice that they
make, there is surely a risk of double-counting in assuming that labour force participation is rising and that the
increasing number of self-employed would necessarily all prefer to work as employees.

Finally, of course, there is uncertainty in the calculations I have presented above. The figures there for hours
worked and rates of pay for people in different circumstances are presented as point estimates. In fact they are
of course calculated from the Labour Force Survey, and there is a considerable margin of uncertainty
surrounding many of them. Those used in the calculation of the effective labour input of formerly unemployed
people are assuming that the figures of Table 1 are relevant for the whole of the period of interest while some
abatement, particularly of the hours penalty might be expected. After all, Table 6 implies quite a high exit rate
from underemployment.

I am, faut de mieux, making the judgement that any underestimate to the degree of spare capacity which might
result from the neglect of participation effects and the decay of the unemployment penalty is probably broadly
offset by the assumption that, after the adjustments I have made, all of the net underemployment can be utilised
over the two to three year period of concern to us. No-one could say, however, that it was unreasonable for
other people to make different judgements. Indeed it is unlikely that the differences resulting from judgements of
this type are large relative to the general uncertainty surrounding estimates of labour market slack.
15

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

15

Conclusions

With wage growth currently well under two per cent I do not think there are many economists who would doubt
that unemployment can fall some way before the economy faces any risk that wage pressures in a tight labour
market will push inflation above target. Based on Bank work exploring the relationship between unemployment
and wage inflation, I am comfortable that hours worked could increase by around one per cent as a result of that
mechanism. There must, however, be a very substantial margin of uncertainty around this figure. A calculation
of the growth in output likely to result from such an increase in hours worked needs, additionally, to take account
of the fact that newly employed people earn less than the average both because they tend to be younger than
average and because there is a wage penalty associated with a history of unemployment. The change in
effective employment is likely to be less than the crude reduction in unemployment might indicate.

The treatment of underemployment as a source of labour market slack is rather more involved. First, without
some evidence that underemployment influences wage inflation, this means it can be seen as spare capacity
only in so far as the workings of the labour market mean that it is drawn down broadly in step with
unemployment. Secondly, a general improvement in economic conditions may mean that people lose interest in
increasing their working hours, even without any actual change; people’s desired hours may be sensitive to the
state of the economy. Even, however, putting these concerns to one side, a calculation which takes account of
the fact that underemployed people earn less than overemployed people and that people seem satisfied with
smaller changes to their working hours than they had said they wanted, results in the impact of this being rather
smaller than might appear at first sight.

I should stress that these observations do not leave me uncomfortable with the broad pattern of the forecast the
MPC produced for February’s Inflation Report. Rather, I think the forecast is broadly consistent with slack being
used up over the next two to three years while the collective judgement of the committee was that slack would
remain at the end of that period. The overall degree of uncertainty surrounding this is of course considerable
and is reflected in the fan charts for output and inflation which the MPC produces. I might also add that the
reason these issues were not aired in the minutes of our February meeting or in the Inflation Report is rather
mundane; much of the results I showed you today reflect work done since then.

While I am like other members of the Committee, keen to explain the structure underlying our forecast, it is very
important that the associated profiles for variables such as growth and unemployment are not interpreted in any
sense as targets that the Committee has adopted. In the same way, while I expect interest rates to remain low
over the next two to three years, it is not possible to guarantee this. The MPC’s target remains consumer price
inflation of two per cent as set out by the Chancellor and restated yesterday (Osborne, 2014). We set interest
rates to deliver that inflation target in the light of the economic facts as they evolve.

16

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

16

References
Arulampalam, W. (2001), ‘Is unemployment really scarring? Effects of unemployment experiences on wages’,
Economic Journal, 111, F585-606
Attanasio, O., H. Low and V. Sanchez-Marcos (2005), ‘Female labour supply as insurance against
idiosyncratic risk’, Journal of the European Economic Association Papers and Proceedings, 3, 755-764.
Bell, D.N.F and Blanchflower, D., (2013). `Underemployment in the UK Revisited’. National Institute
Economic Review, 224, F8-F22.
Benito, A. and J. Saleheen (2013), ‘Labour supply as a buffer: evidence from UK households’, Economica, 80,
689-720.
Gregory, M. and R. Jukes (2001), ‘Unemployment and subsequent earnings: estimating scarring among
British men 1984-94’, Economic Journal, 111, F607-625
Layard, R., S. Nickell and R. Jackman (1991) Unemployment: macroeconomic performance and the labour
market, Oxford University Press
Lazear, E. P. and S. Rosen (1981), ‘Rank-order tournaments as optimum labour contracts’, Journal of Political
Economy, 89, 841-864.
Office for Budget Responsibility (2011). Estimating the Output Gap”. Briefing paper No 2.
http://budgetresponsibility.org.uk/wordpress/docs/briefing%20paper%20No2%20FINAL.pdf
th

Osborne, G. (2014). Letter to the Governor of the Bank of England. 19 March.
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetarypolicy/Documents/pdf/chancellorletter140319.pdf
Stewart, M. B. and J. K. Swaffield (1997), ‘Constraints on the desired hours of work of British men’, Economic
Journal, 107, 520-535.
Wooldridge, J.M. (2002), ‘Inverse probability weighted M-estimators for sample selection, attrition, and
stratification’, Portuguese Economic Journal, 1, 117-139.

17

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

17

Data Appendix

This appendix details the variables used and assumptions made to generate Tables 1 & 2 and 4-7.

Tables 1 & 2
Tables 1 and 2 use the Quarterly Labour Force Survey (QLFS) data from the second quarter of 2013.The
variable oycirc details the respondent’s employment situation 12 months previously. We chose to censor the
total actual hours worked variable (sumhrs) at 97 hours per week. Pay information is contained in the variable
hourpay. Data were weighted using the appropriate weights (person or person income weights).

Tables 4, 5, & 6
To generate the figures in tables 4, 5 & 6 we first merged together the QLFS datasets from 2012 and 2013. For
example, we kept all of the individuals who were first interviewed in the first quarter of 2012 and match this data
to the responses that these individuals gave to the survey in 2013 Q1, the last time that they were interviewed.
This process was repeated for the second, third and fourth quarters. As mentioned in the text, when matching
data in this way it is necessary to account for the non-random attrition, and we did this by estimating how the
probability of dropping out depends on age and education, and adjusting the importance given to each
observation in the light of this.
The variables in the QLFS data that detail the respondent’s desired increase or reduction in hours are undhrs
and ovrhrs respectively. We again chose to censor all of the hours variables at 97 hours per week.
Following other papers in the literature, we chose to make several modifications to the information contained in
the desired hours variables. These were:


Claims of underemployment among those aged between 16 and 18 and working 40 hours or more per
week, and those aged over 18 and working 48 hours or more per week, were disregarded.



Claims of overemployment among those aged between 16 and 18 and working 15 or fewer hours per
week, and those aged over 18 and working 20 or fewer hours per week, were disregarded.



Desired extra hours were constrained to be no more than the total actual number of hours worked per
week.

The final assumption we made in order to produce Tables 4, 5 and 6 is to exclude those individuals who report
that they were employed, but that their total actual number of hours worked was zero.

Table 7
The figures in Table 7 derive from the 2013 Q4 QLFS and our calculations from the figures in Tables 1, 4 and 5.

18

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

18

