Solvency II: Approaching the try line
Speech given by
Sam Woods, Executive Director of Insurance Supervision, Bank of England

Association of British Insurers, London
3 November 2015

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Before we start today’s panel session, I wanted to take this opportunity to say a few words. I promise to be
brief.

As a general rule, I am not a fan of sporting metaphors in speeches. But as a New Zealander I find it
impossible not to introduce a minor element of rugby given the events of last weekend.

Like the Rugby World Cup Final, the run-up to Solvency II has been a long, arduous undertaking. The
players, including many of you and many of my staff, have been grinding down the pitch for a decade. But by
my reckoning, at T-minus 59 days to the arrival of Solvency II we are now at the equivalent of 1.62 metres
away from the try line. I feel like the last back in the line, ball in hand and (hopefully) moments away from
scoring.
So the first thing I wanted to do is thank you – whether you are on my team or someone else’s – for the huge
effort that has gone into getting us to this point. Next I would like to recap what’s in store over the next few
months and offer a few of my own early reflections on the new regime.

Solvency II: using stoppage time

I am confident that we have made the most of any stoppage time afforded by policy delays during the
negotiations over Solvency II. We introduced the internal model approval process, developed ICAS+ and
have been running “pre–applications” for some time now. These processes and pre-applications were
brought in to provide opportunities for feedback and allow firms to kick the tyres before switching their
models on.

But where are we now? The PRA is busily reviewing around 300 Solvency II applications, of which around 20
applications are from firms seeking approval to use an internal model on day one of the new regime.

It is essential that our process for reviewing these applications is fair and consistent across our firms, not
least in order to preserve orderly markets. In order to deliver this, each firm’s internal model application is
being taken to a recommendation panel made up of PRA senior management. This will be followed by a
further review by a separate senior decision-making panel which will look at all the decisions in the round
and make the final calls.

We are intending to communicate our decisions on matching adjustment applications to each individual firm
simultaneously in early November, and to notify those firms which have gained internal model approval in
advance of 1/1/16 at the same time in early December.

So, November and December will see the culmination of some excellent preparatory work, numerous years
in the making. However, I should stress use of the word ‘preparatory’. Come January, we will not be sitting
2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2

on the side-lines. I know better than most that there is still work to be done, not least because of the
significant number of firms whom I expect to submit applications that will need to be considered over the
course of 2016.

To be clear, internal model approval is not an end in itself. For some firms, an internal model might not be
the right answer – the standard formula is perfectly appropriate for the large majority of our firms, and for
others a partial internal model might be the right answer. For those who do gain model approval this
December, they should make sure their models remain fit for purpose on an ongoing basis and will need to
assure us that this is the case.

A margin for risk

In the UK, firms have already been operating under the ICAS regime for a number of years and many of the
principles of ICAS will continue under Solvency II. However, as with any new regime, Solvency II will
introduce some changes.
I would like to touch briefly on one such change – the role of the risk margin in the new regime, because in
my opinion the legislation is not explicit about this (though it is clear about how it should be calculated).

The intellectual construct for the risk margin is that it is the compensation that a third party would require in
order to take on the assets and liabilities of another firm that runs into trouble, as compared to the current
regime where we assume the firm goes into closed run-off. This would reduce the risk for the purchaser of
the liabilities turning out to be bigger than expected. Many of us have therefore used, as shorthand,
a description of the risk margin as facilitating a shift from a gone to a going concern regime. Whilst this is
crudely true, this interpretation does not adequately, to my mind, explain the role of the risk margin.
The reason for this is simple. Any firm that takes on another firm’s assets and liabilities will itself have to hold
a risk margin against that balance sheet, just like the transferor had to the day before. So the compensation
for the transferee only materialises when the liabilities run off and the risk margin is released.
This is a somewhat attenuated conception of ‘going concern’. It would therefore perhaps be better to talk
about the risk margin as a shift to a fully market-consistent regime. Nonetheless, one thing is clear: the risk
margin should provide an extra degree of protection for policyholders, which should advance the PRA’s
objectives. For instance, the presence of the risk margin may enable ‘white knight’ deals to take place at a
wider range of sale values, because of the additional security it affords the buyer – and this may prove
beneficial if we are faced with a firm in distress.

3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

3

So as a supervisor I think the idea of the risk margin is a good one. And as a practical matter, it will be the
law from 1 January and we will implement it properly. However, in the medium-term I think legitimate
questions could be asked about whether the way it is calculated under the Directive is really optimal.

I will touch on two points here:

i.

Because of the flat 6% cost of capital in the Directive, the risk margin is very sensitive indeed to
risk-free rates. For example, we estimate that a 50bps increase in risk-free rates would reduce the
risk margin for the UK life sector by around 20%. There are reasons why investors might seek more
compensation when rates are low, but it is also possible that the rate of return threshold could
become lower in such conditions. Personally I am sceptical that such a high degree of volatility is
desirable from a microprudential or macroprudential point of view.

ii.

The risk margin is intended to capture ‘non-hedgeable’ risks such as longevity. But it is plain that in
some circumstances life insurers can shift out longevity risk through swaps or other methods. We
are monitoring this activity carefully – but it does beg the philosophical question: what is
non-hedgeable? The reinsurance activity also raises practical questions about how we manage the
interaction of different regimes across the world, many of which have no concept of a risk margin.
I am worried that the unintended result could in fact be reduced, not enhanced, protection for
policyholders.

With rates where they are, the risk margin is currently large for UK life insurers. In the near-to-medium term,
transitional measures absorb the impact of this – and I would like to repeat what I said in July: the Bank will
allow full use of transitional measures by those firms that qualify to use them. And when we consider whether
or not firms are in a position to pay dividends, one of the main quantitative yardsticks we will use is capital
levels after the benefit of transitionals.

Level playing field

I have no doubt that, when compared to the situation today, Solvency II will be a massive leap forward in
terms of establishing a level playing field across Europe. Indeed, for the first time we will all be playing the
same game!

But of course, as we get into the nitty-gritty of implementation then some differences in national styles will
emerge. It is even possible that a few nasty things might go on in the scrum before the referee is able to
intervene.

4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

4

Looked at in the round, I think these differences are surprisingly modest so far. There is no equivalent of the
northern hemisphere / southern hemisphere divide. But I do want to touch very briefly on one current area of
difference – how to implement the volatility adjustment.

It remains our view, and that of some others in Europe, that firms should not assume any change to the level
of volatility adjustment when calculating their capital requirements. The position we have taken is based on
our reading of the Directive, and the purpose of the volatility adjustment. On the former, the Directive states
straightforwardly that the SCR shall not cover the risk of loss of basic own funds resulting from changes in
the volatility adjustment. On the latter, our view is that to take full credit for a dynamic volatility adjustment
upfront would make the volatility adjustment a less effective lever for the authorities to pull when the stress
actually arises, by increasing the discount rate insurers can use to value their liabilities.

But there is another school of thought, favoured by some others in Europe, which is that if the purpose of an
internal model is to forecast changes to a firm’s balance sheet in a 1-in-200 stress, then it is illogical to
isolate this one element and hold it fixed. This is not an incoherent view, but I think that the prudential
arguments, both macro and micro, point firmly the other way.

I mention this issue not to do the arguments full justice, but just to illustrate the sorts of differences which will
inevitably emerge as we bring all of our regimes together into a single new one. This issue, and any others
like it, will need to be ironed out before too long.

The height of the bar
To conclude my talk to you today, I would like to touch on what ‘normal’ will look like under Solvency II.

Solvency II is clear that firms must hold sufficient capital to meet their Solvency Capital Requirement (SCR). I
believe that we have done a thorough and robust job in making sure that for UK firms that requirement
represents a 1-in-200 year standard, as set down in the legislation. Although this calibration is the same as
the one we have been using under the ICAS regime, this has not been easy for anyone on the pitch, and
while no one has been stretchered off I’m afraid that a certain amount of blood has been spilt.

Solvency II sets the bar at 1-in-200, broadly equivalent to a BBB rating. However, Solvency II does not
require us to place an extra bar on top of that bar. So I am concerned when I hear market participants
assuming that there is some other bar, very much higher than the SCR, which all firms must somehow meet
in order to satisfy regulators.

Now of course analysts, investors and people running insurance firms may pursue a higher bar if they wish
to – for instance, in order to achieve a higher credit rating. And as a practical matter, the frictional costs to a
firm of running so close to its SCR that it is constantly breaching it might be quite high. So as in all regulatory
5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

5

regimes that I have experienced, I expect that many firms will choose to hold some kind of buffer above their
SCR.

Supervisors also naturally tend to monitor capital more closely as a firm comes closer to its regulatory
requirement – this is common sense. We will of course do this under Solvency II, taking into account the
volatility of each firm’s capital position and the risks to which it is exposed as set out in its Own Risk and
Solvency Assessment (ORSA). However, I would like to caution market participants against the idea that we
have in mind a single ratio, somewhere very high above the SCR, which we have set as an intervention point
across the insurance sector. That would be illegal, would frustrate the intention of legislators to deliver a
1-in-200 level of solvency across Europe, and would not take into account the different risks different firms
run.

Approaching the try line

Now, I calculate that during the course of this 15 minute talk we have moved approximately 0.28 millimetres
closer to the Solvency II try line. Actually the truth is that I am terrible at running, one reason among many
(you should see my ball-handling skills) why I am pursuing a career as a public sector official rather than an
All Black! But despite that, between us all I am confident that we will ground the ball.

Many thanks for your time today.

6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

6

