Solvency II – a turning point
Speech given by Julian Adams, Deputy Head of the Prudential Regulation Authority and
Executive Director of Insurance

PRA Solvency II industry briefing, London
Thursday 12 December 2013

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Good morning and thank you for coming today. I am sure that many of you will be as relieved as I am to hear
that I will not be starting with an update on the delays and uncertainty of Solvency II. For the first time, I am
able to note that there has been a significant agreement reached during negotiations in Europe on both the
timetable and key policy issues.

I want to use my time with you today to go through what these developments mean for our implementation of
Solvency II. In particular, where we are now and what still has to be done. As you will see there is still some
way to go.

Solvency II policy development

The first thing to say is that we now have certainty on the timetable for Solvency II. The Commission has
been clear that the latest “quick fix” directive to set the date will be the last which means that the new regime
will begin on 1 January 2016. In order to prepare for implementation, the transposition date for
Member States has been set for 31 March 2015. This means that from 1 April 2015, Member States will be
empowered to give Solvency II related approvals. This outcome is consistent with the planning assumption
we have been using in the UK since late last year. But we and firms will need to step up our work to have
everything in place to be truly ready for Solvency II.

This will include incorporating agreements reached on policy areas that had previously been uncertain or
unstable. I realise that a number of firms downsized their Solvency II programmes and reallocated resources
to other initiatives and priorities. It is now time to reassess priorities and make a concerted push to be able to
demonstrate compliance with the new regime two years from now.

The trialogue discussions reached agreement on a number of areas to be included in the
Omnibus II Directive. I’d like to focus on three today – the matching adjustment, equivalence and the
transitional on technical provisions.

The first is the matching adjustment. The PRA welcomes the recognition that insurers that can closely match
predictable liabilities face a reduced level of spread risk. But it’s very important that firms make appropriate
allowance for the residual risks that they face, for example the risk of unexpected asset defaults and
downgrades. We expect to have discussions with firms about the effect of the matching adjustment on the
calculation of both capital and technical provisions.

The second area is equivalence. In the context of the group solvency calculation it is anticipated that it will be
possible for non-EEA territories to have their solvency regimes deemed by the European Commission
‘provisionally equivalent’ to Solvency II for a, potentially renewable, ten year period. This may result in local
solvency standards being used when valuing subsidiaries of UK groups based in ‘provisionally equivalent’
jurisdictions. A number of details remain to be determined but in all discussions about equivalence, it is
2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2

important to remember the end goal – that there is convergence towards genuinely comparable regimes and
levels of policyholder protection across territories. In this context we are pleased to see the IAIS progressing
on developing ComFrame and global insurance capital standards.

Third is the transitional arrangement that has been agreed for technical provisions. Firms will have 16 years
to build up to holding full Solvency II technical provisions on their existing business as at ‘day one’. During
the transitional period there will be a ‘floor’ to ensure that firms will not be held to lower solvency standards
than those of the pre-Solvency II regime of the Member State – so for UK insurers that will be ICAS or,
where it bites, Pillar 1 of Solvency I. Given that the risk margin can introduce a very significant additional
liability for some firms under the new regime, we welcome a sensible and smooth transition to the prudential
standards of Solvency II. But we are also pleased that we have the safeguard of the transitional floor.

The Omnibus II Directive is tabled for a plenary vote in the European Parliament in the first quarter of 2014.
A positive outcome will trigger the next stage of agreement of European legislation and regulation. We
understand that the Commission aims to publish delegated acts next summer, but they hope to have a stable
version ready by March. Implementing technical standards are expected to be produced by the Commission
in three waves in the run up to the transposition date of 31 March 2015. The Commission expects to adopt
the first wave of implementing technical standards in October 2014. And, in outline, that gives us the
roadmap of the European policy needed for the implementation of Solvency II in 2016.

Alongside this, the PRA will be working to ensure readiness for the Solvency II regime. We will be putting in
place the processes and systems needed to prepare for and operate in a Solvency II world, including the
approval and supervisory review processes, and the IT capabilities needed for regulatory reporting.

Gearing up for Solvency II in 2016

So you will see that there is much to do to make sure that we are ready for 2016. The European Insurance
and Occupational Pension Authority’s – EIOPA’s – preparatory guidelines are clearly very important and
helpful in this regard and I will return to those shortly.

But, it is important that firms stay appraised of developments in delegated acts, implementing technical
standards and guidance to be issued by the Commission and EIOPA. These are the instruments that will
translate high level policy into practical reality.

This will represent a significant change in the way that many insurers will need to engage with material which
sets regulatory requirements on them. The PRA Handbook will follow a different approach to our current
INSPRU content. We will be adopting an ‘intelligent copy out’ approach – meaning we will be following the
words of the Directive text as closely as possible. As such we will only depart from the Directive text in
specific circumstances and will not be reproducing or providing significant interpretation or elaboration of
3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

3

European legislative or regulatory material. Indeed, we are not entitled to do so. In some circumstances we
may judge that general guidance is needed to clarify our expectations of firms – and in such circumstances,
where it is possible to do so, we may issue supervisory statements.

Applying EIOPA’s preparatory guidelines to PRA authorised firms
This brings me to EIOPA’s preparatory guidelines and the PRA’s supervisory statement published today.

EIOPA published guidelines for the preparation of Solvency II in October this year. The guidelines cover four
areas that EIOPA considers fundamental to ensure effective preparation and convergence in the run up to
Solvency II. We support EIOPA’s approach and issued a draft statement for consultation in October setting
out our expectations of firms in the preparatory period.
Overall, respondents welcomed the pragmatic and proportionate approach we are taking to apply EIOPA’s
preparatory guidelines. We have been very clear that the emphasis is on preparations for Solvency II and not
its early implementation. We are not gold plating any of the guidelines. Our supervisory statement sets out
how we shall apply EIOPA’s guidelines to authorised firms affected by the Directive. The statement has
separate chapters on each guideline area: systems of governance; the Own Risk and Solvency Assessment
(ORSA); regulatory reporting; and pre-application for internal models. As many of the guidelines represent
good practice in conformity with existing UK rules, they should not present an additional burden for many
firms.

There is no need for me to repeat the contents of our statement here. Instead, I will highlight a couple of
points before moving on to our expectations during the preparatory period.

The current supervisory regime does not go away. Firms will need to continue to meet existing regulatory
requirements until Solvency II is implemented. We recognise that there are elements of the guidelines which
will which require significant effort and resource. Where possible, and as we did for ICAS+, we will look for
ways that firms may be able to use their preparations for Solvency II to meet the current requirements.
The PRA’s expectations in the four areas of EIOPA’s guidelines are aimed at all firms and groups affected by
Solvency II. For all firms – including smaller firms - we expect preparations to be made in a way that is
appropriate to the nature, scale and complexity of their business. This is what we mean by proportionality. It
does not mean that firms can select which requirements to comply with or not. When it comes to groups, we
will be asking firms to have discussions with their supervisor on how they intend to plan to be ready for the
new regime, and the specific requirements it places on groups.

4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

4

Own Risk and Solvency Assessment

In many respects, the ORSA can be considered the cornerstone of Solvency II. We expect to receive an
annual ORSA supervisory report from all firms from January 2014 onwards; several firms have already
developed something similar for internal purposes. To reflect the preparatory nature of the guidelines, we
expect that by the second year the ORSA will be of a higher standard than the first but we will review these
documents on a proportionate basis and give feedback where appropriate. Looking ahead, we attach
considerable importance to the ORSA and the role that it will play in future to support the Threshold
Condition that insurers must have appropriate non-financial resources and robust risk and capital
management systems.

Reporting during the preparatory period

When looking at the guidelines on regulatory reporting, EIOPA has stated that only firms falling within certain
thresholds will be expected to submit reports during the preparatory period. This does not however, remove
the need for all firms to start getting ready for Solvency II reporting.

In November, we set up an industry working group so that the PRA and industry representatives could
discuss the technical issues related to the implementation of Solvency II reporting. These include areas
where policy is clear but data is difficult to provide or does not currently exist within the firm. It is also a useful
forum to gain technical input on specific issues such as the reporting templates and taxonomy. We have
published materials from the working group on our dedicated Solvency II webpages and will continue to do
so.

We are very much aware of the concerns raised by the industry about the cost of the potential duplication of
work and parallel running and we remain committed to reducing any unnecessary burden on firms where we
can. We continue to think it reasonable to expect firms to be ready to provide Solvency II based reporting six
months before implementation. This means that firms falling within the thresholds should be able to submit
their reports in July 2015 which will be in line with the usual half-yearly financial reporting cycle for the
majority of firms. Saying that, we acknowledge the concerns raised by some respondents to the consultation
on our statement that the ability to comply with the guidelines is dependent on the availability of timely and
complete reporting templates and taxonomy. We will review the practicability of the reporting timetable in the
event of delays to this material being available. Make no mistake – this does not take away from the fact that
firms will need to get ready for Solvency II reporting, with higher quality reports and better synchronised
reporting.

5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

5

Pre-application for internal models
I’m pleased to say that EIOPA’s guidelines on pre-application for internal models support the on-going
pre-application process that we have in place at the PRA. We will continue to work with firms in IMAP and
through the ICAS+ process.

It is critical that firms keep to their allocated submission slot. The importance of this may be lost in the mists
of time, so it may be useful for me to set this out clearly.

The submission schedule was created to plan and prioritise work in order for firms to be able to receive
decisions on their model for ‘day one’. When a slot is allocated, it is essential that firms make their
submission to the required standard of quality, on time and to the agreed level of completeness, as we have
allocated finite resource on that basis. We have also designed the system so that we review similar firms at a
similar time, thus enabling us to ensure consistency of treatment. To date, we have exercised some flexibility
with firms, particularly given the uncertainty on the timetable and policy. This will no longer be possible as we
have a hard implementation date.

Firms that are not able to make their submission slot will lose it and will join the end of the queue. This is not
a decision we have taken lightly, not least because we are aware that the repercussions for some firms of
not achieving model approval are potentially severe. But equally it is one which we are perfectly prepared to
take, and have been clear with firms that we expect them to have contingency plans in place to deal with a
situation where their model is not approved.

We have said before, and I will say again, we make no apology for being robust in our approach to internal
model approval. Models must meet the required tests and standards, capture all quantifiable risks, and
deliver prudentially sound outcomes in a range of scenarios and over time.

Sharing information and experiences

We know from our work with insurers on Solvency II that it is useful to share information and experiences as
we all prepare for the new regime. During the preparatory period we will continue to do this as far, and as
soon, as we are able and we encourage the industry to do the same.

For internal model firms, we have compiled examples of good and bad practice in helping us to review the
documentation submitted to us during the internal model approval process. We are publishing that on our
dedicated Solvency II pages today and encourage firms to refer to it.

We have also invested significant resource in our actuarial departments to produce a series of technical
papers. It is our intention to share our views and summary findings with you in the New Year. This could be
6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

6

in the form of publications and/or a series of technical sessions. We know from industry feedback that you
would welcome our views in some areas, which we hope will help improve the quality of IMAP submissions.
Receiving better quality submissions will enable us to make more efficient use of our specialist resources
and have more useful conversations with firms about their model.
I’ve talked about pre-application for internal model firms because this is where our activity has been, and will
continue to be, the most intense. But the majority of UK insurers will be relying on the standard formula to
calculate the Solvency Capital Requirement – or SCR.

In my letter to firms in May, I set out our approach for standard formula firms. I said then that we were
considering a number of areas and circumstances in which the standard formula may not be appropriate, for
example, in capturing pension risk. We are still waiting for the finalised standard formula calibrations in the
Level 2 text. In the meantime, firms should continue to ensure that their chosen method to calculate their
Solvency II SCR is suitable, and where necessary, consider whether it is appropriate to use undertaking
specific parameters, or a partial internal model, where the standard formula does not adequately reflect the
firm’s idiosynchratic risk profile.

There will also be a number of Solvency II related approvals that firms will need to make to us in advance of
1 January 2016. More information on these is expected in the delegated acts and implementing technical
standards in the coming year.

Looking ahead

Looking out, two years may seem like a reasonably long period of time. However, working backwards - and
taking into account the time needed to make decisions - shortens it markedly from 24 months to closer to 15
months - which ties in with transposition on 31 March 2015.

So you can see that there is a lot to do and getting to January 2016 in good shape is only the start. If our
experience of Solvency II is the same as for the introduction of the ICAS regime in the UK – and taking into
account transitional arrangements - we may be looking at the best part of a decade for us and firms to be
able to use the regime. It is worth remembering that ICAS is both much simpler in design and ambition and
also much less prescriptive than Solvency II.

Looking beyond Europe, we are also at a point of fundamental change in the development of global
insurance regulation .The IAIS is working towards a common supervisory framework for internationally active
insurance groups through its ComFrame initiative. It has also recently announced that it will develop a
risk-based global insurance capital standard within ComFrame by 2016. So European insurance regulation
will have the ability to both shape – and in turn be shaped by – wider global developments.

7

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

7

These initiatives in insurance supervision – more immediately in Solvency II but closely followed by the work
of the IAIS – makes it imperative for firms stay abreast of developments and commit the time and resource
needed to keep pace. We are going through a period of unprecedented change and both firms and
supervisors have to adapt to secure the benefits. As you will see, whilst much has been accomplished,
there’s much more for us all to do.

8

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

8

