Some Lessons for Monetary Policy from the Recent Financial
Turmoil
Remarks given by
Charles Bean, Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy of the Bank of England

At a Conference on Globalisation, Inflation and Monetary Policy, Istanbul
22 November 2008

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

The present financial crisis has many parents, encompassing both market failures and
supervisory shortcomings. A non-exhaustive list would include: inadequate
incentives for care in the origination of loans if the risks are to be passed on; extreme
opacity in the nature of the risks underlying complex structured finance assets; too
much reliance on statistical models of risk based on past behaviour; disproportionate
dependence on ratings by end-investors and a failure to observe due diligence;
excessive closeness of the ratings agencies to those who were issuing debt;
compensation schemes in financial institutions that encouraged excessive risk-taking
and a focus on short-term returns; a failure by originating banks to realise the extent to
which distributed risks could return to them; excessive reliance on short-term
wholesale funding and inadequate attention to the potential liquidity of assets; and a
failure by regulatory and supervisory authorities to appreciate fully the risks inherent
in the ‘originate-to-distribute’ model. The ongoing work of the Financial Stability
Forum and G20 to address these and related issues and to strengthen the financial
system against any future repeat is, of course, extremely welcome.

But these are just the collective match that ignited the conflagration. You need fuel to
make a fire too. And that was provided by the ex-ante excess supply of global
savings over investment, which pushed real interest rates on safe assets to historically
low levels, reinforced by loose monetary policy. That in turn encouraged a ‘search
for yield’ and a compression of risk premia as financial institutions sought returns
high enough to meet end-investors’ unchanged expectations. Moreover, higher asset
prices raised the net worth of financial companies, allowing more borrowing and
further compressing yields.

This ‘savings glut’, as Chairman Ben Bernanke christened it, was in part the result of
high national savings rates in some Asian emerging economies, especially China,
which despite high investment rates, chose to export capital rather than import it, as
standard theory would lead one to expect. High savings rates in Japan for
demographic reasons and, latterly, also by some of the major oil producers further

2

boosted the supply of global savings. One factor behind the high level of savings by
the emerging market economies was their experience during the 1997-8 Asia crisis,
when several countries were forced to tighten policy sharply in the face of a ‘sudden
stop’ of capital inflows from abroad. Thereafter, a strategy of relying on domestic
savings to finance investment and the accumulation of a substantial war chest of
foreign reserves looked more appealing. Another was the lack of an adequate social
welfare net that encouraged high levels of precautionary savings by households.

On top of this, global monetary conditions were relatively easy for much of the past
decade. In the United States, monetary policy was relaxed aggressively during the
ICT-led downturn that started in 2001. With growing concerns about the possibility
of deflation, policy was deliberately kept loose until mid-2004, even though the
economy had begun to recover earlier. For instance, John Taylor1 has calculated that
applying his eponymous Taylor Rule in mid-2004 would have pointed to a Federal
Funds rate as much as 300 basis points higher. And even once the monetary stimulus
was withdrawn, it was carried out at a ‘measured pace’.

Because a number of countries, most obviously China, chose to peg their currencies
either to the dollar or to a basket in which the dollar featured heavily, the FOMC had
to cut rates more aggressively to maintain domestic activity than would have been the
case if the dollar had been free to depreciate against them. Moreover, by virtue of the
currency pegs, this monetary looseness in the United States was transmitted overseas,
despite attempts at sterilisation. Now the primary driver behind the surge in
commodity prices over the past three years or so has been the rapid development of
the emerging market economies and the consequent growth in commodity demand
running up against relatively inelastic supply. But the general pickup in inflation
worldwide, together with the appreciation of a range of asset prices, suggests that
accommodative monetary policies may have also played a part.

1

John B. Taylor, ‘Housing and Monetary Policy’ in Housing, Housing Finance and Monetary Policy,
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2008.

3

The pattern of global imbalances that resulted from this mix of policies has vexed
policymakers for some time. We knew they were unsustainable and worried that the
unwinding might be disorderly, though I don’t think anyone could have guessed the
course that events would actually take. But we did see that there were vulnerabilities
present. However, nothing very much was done about these imbalances. Why was
that?

In my view, it is a mistake to point the finger at any individual country’s choice of
policies. Given historical experience and the desire to facilitate rapid development,
the Chinese strategy of export-led growth and high savings, facilitated by a weak
renminbi, seems entirely rational. But that meant the rest of the world, and in
particular the United States, needed to be willing to run a substantial current account
deficit and capital account surplus if overall macroeconomic balance was to be
maintained. Likewise, the Fed’s desire to keep long-term interest rates low so as to
counter the threat of deflation in the wake of the sharp slowdown in growth in the
early years of this decade was understandable. But the net effect of these policies that
were sensible from a national perspective was to generate an equilibrium for the world
economy in which there was an ample supply of cheap funds looking for a suitable
home. That home turned out to be mainly the housing market in a number of the
advanced economies, particularly the United States as well as the United Kingdom.

A lesson from this episode is that the pursuit of rational policies from a national
perspective need not result in a satisfactory overall equilibrium. Of course, it was
precisely this realisation that drove Keynes’ vision of the post-war economic order.
With reform of the international financial institutions on the agenda once more, now
is the time to start thinking again how we can better guide the choice and operation of
national policy and regulatory frameworks so that they result in a coherent and
sustainable outcome for the world as a whole, not just at the national level.

The IMF, for example, could usefully increase its focus on the mutual sustainability
of national policy frameworks, analyse in more depth how policy actions within them
interact internationally and identify those that are likely lead to unsatisfactory or

4

unsustainable global outcomes. Ideally, the international community ought then to be
in a position to prevent the adoption of such frameworks, though I recognise that
translating this into concrete action is a difficult task. One of the key challenges is
that policy makers need to recognise that acting collectively will be in their own
national interest. But then the same could have been said about the difficulty of
promoting free trade and preventing protectionism before the foundation of the
GATT/WTO. In any case, unless we grasp this nettle, the world economy may
continue to be prone to the build-up of financial imbalances and their subsequent
disorderly unwind. The G20 has an important role in taking this forward, with all of
the right countries present around the table.

Let me now leave the global imbalances and policy externalities to one side and
address a second issue: what role should monetary policy play in restraining an assetprice boom driven by excessive credit expansion? As I noted earlier, an abundance of
liquidity was probably a contributory – though in my view not the primary – factor
behind the decline in global real interest rates, the build-up of leverage in the financial
system and the consequent asset-price boom. Yet this took place when central banks
in the advanced economies were (fairly successfully) pursuing monetary policies in
which price stability was a central objective, either as the primary objective as in the
case of the European Central Bank and the Bank of England, or as part of a dual
mandate in the case of the US Federal Reserve. Could we – and should we – have
used monetary policy more actively to counter the build-up of credit and the
associated increase in house and other asset prices?

One view, long advanced by Bill White and his colleagues at the Bank for
International Settlements2, is that an exclusive focus on the stability of the prices of
goods and services is conducive to a build-up of financial imbalances and associated
asset price boom-busts. In the past, excessive credit growth tended to generate a
pickup in inflation, necessitating a subsequent tightening in monetary policy, which in
turn dampened both credit growth and inflation. But the success of inflation targeting
and similar monetary frameworks in anchoring inflation expectations have flattened

5

the short-run Phillips curve trade-off and attenuated the inflationary impact of
excessive credit growth, so lessening the pressure on the central bank to tighten
policy. Moreover, in many of the advanced economies that experienced credit and
housing booms, demand expansion was not unduly rapid: for instance, the average
rate of growth of UK final domestic demand over the 2004-7 period was just 2¾%.

Now the unwinding of financial imbalances has often proved costly in the past in
terms of lost output and increased unemployment. For instance, although there is a
wide range of national experiences, Carmen Reinhart and Ken Rogoff3 find that postwar financial crises in the advanced economies have, on average, been associated with
a drop in real per capita growth of over two per cent and that it typically takes two
years to return to trend; for the most catastrophic cases, the drop in growth was as
much as five percentage points. Relatedly, the latest IMF World Economic Outlook
contains analysis suggesting that downturns that are preceded by financial stress are
on average associated with cumulative output losses about two percentage points
higher than those that are not.

Given the potential costs of a bust, it would therefore appear to be wise to use
monetary policy to try to prevent the build-up of the imbalances in the first place.
Note that this is not going so far as to advocate targeting asset prices. That would
place the burden of adjustment to real shocks – such as an improvement in
productivity which should raise real equity prices, or an increase in population which
should raise real house prices – on to the less flexible prices of goods and services
rather than the highly flexible asset price. That cannot make sense. But it does at
least justify ‘leaning against the wind’ during the upswing phase of a credit/assetprice boom in order to moderate the boom and thus also the prospective fallout from
any subsequent bust. Steve Cecchetti and others4 have advocated just such an
approach.
2

See, for instance: William White ‘Is price stability enough?’, Bank for International Settlements
Working Paper No 205, April 2006.
3
Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff, ‘Is the 2007 US Sub-Prime Financial Crisis So Different? An
International Historical Comparison’, American Economic Review, May 2008, pp.339-344.
4
See, for instance: Stephen Cecchetti, Hans Genberg and Sushil Wadhwani, ‘Asset Prices in a Flexible
Inflation Targeting Framework’, in W. Hunter, G. Kaufman and M. Pomerleano, eds., Asset Price

6

Previously, I have argued5 that a suitably flexible inflation targeting regime already
provides the scope to take on board such concerns about the risks associated with
excessive credit growth. For instance, the remit to the Bank of England’s Monetary
Policy Committee allows us to deviate from the inflation target in the near term, if by
doing so it would enhance our chances of meeting it further out. A sharp contraction
associated with the unwinding of a credit boom increases the likelihood of
undershooting the target. So a near-term undershoot during the boom phase may, in
principle, be warranted. Indeed, a central bank seeking to stabilize inflation over a
sufficiently long time horizon should necessarily recognize the possible adverse longterm consequences of a credit-driven asset-price boom in its policy deliberations.

While the argument that central banks should factor in the long-term implications for
output, and thus also inflation, of credit/asset-price boom-busts is persuasive, there are
practical difficulties in pursuing a ‘leaning against the wind’ policy. These include
the need to decide whether an asset price increase is warranted or whether it is based
on misplaced expectations and poses a threat to future macroeconomic stability and
the possibility that a rate increase might trigger exactly the bust one is worried about.
But then central banks are called on to make difficult judgements all the time.

In my view, the most important qualification is simply that a modest increase in the
official interest rate is unlikely to do much to restrain a credit/asset-price boom that is
in full swing. It is simply not credible to believe that the UK house-price boom that is
now unwinding would never have happened if only the Bank’s Monetary Policy
Committee had set official interest rates just a little bit higher. But an increase large
enough to have had a material effect would have also depressed activity significantly.
I doubt that people would be prepared to accept the clear short-term costs of such a
strategy in return for the uncertain long-term benefits. Moreover, with low global real
interest rates and abundant global liquidity, the effectiveness of monetary tightening
by the Monetary Policy Committee alone in restraining credit growth would have
Bubbles: The Implications for Monetary, Regulatory and International Policies. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 2002, pp.427-444.
5
Charles Bean, ‘Asset Prices, Financial Imbalances and Monetary Policy: Are Inflation Targets
Enough?’ in Asset Prices and Monetary Policy, eds. A.Richards and T. Robinson, Reserve Bank of
Australia, Sydney, 2003.

7

been severely diluted. Co-ordinated action would have been necessary, which links
back to my earlier theme.

The problem here is that the central bank is trying to achieve two objectives – price
stability and the avoidance of unsustainable financial imbalances – with just one
instrument, the official policy rate. So ideally one wants to call on another
instrument, preferably one targeted at the market failure driving the excessive credit
boom. Now confidence in the banking system is a public good, but the management
and shareholders of banks do not have the incentive to internalise this fully. And the
risk and potential cost of a harmful collapse increases as debt and leverage build up.
The obvious way to address this problem is by requiring banks to raise extra buffers
of capital or to put aside additional reserves during the boom phase of the credit cycle,
which can then be called upon if the credit cycle turns.

The Spanish approach of dynamic provisioning represents a particular application of
this general idea. There, banks are required to build up a general reserve equal to the
difference between an estimate of long-term losses and specific provisions on
currently impaired assets. But there are a variety of other ways one might go about
setting up such a scheme. An alternative – or complementary – approach, due to Anil
Kashyap, Jeremy Stein and Raghuram Rajan6, is to get banks to purchase private
capital insurance from a suitable ‘deep pocket’, such as a sovereign wealth fund, that
pays out if aggregate financial conditions deteriorate sufficiently.

In essence, the recent injection of additional capital into the banking systems of a
number of countries, including in the United Kingdom, can be thought of as
mimicking what would have happened with such a pro-cyclical capital requirement.
Under such a regime, banks would have been required to raise extra capital during the
boom phase, which would also have reduced the rate of credit expansion. Then
during the bust phase, minimum capital requirements would be reduced, leaving the
banks with a buffer of excess capital. That in turn would reduce the need for rapid de6

See Anil Kashyap, Jeremy Stein and Raghuram Rajan, ‘Rethinking Capital Regulation ‘, presented at
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium on Maintaining Stability in a Changing Financial
System, 2008.

8

leveraging and moderate any cut-back in lending. That is what the injection of extra
capital is designed to achieve.

There is much work still to do on the design of such macro-prudential regulation. In
particular, there is a range of bank-specific and macroeconomic indicators that could
be used as the key and the right balance between automaticity and discretion in
application needs to be struck. But it has the virtue of addressing the market failure
directly, rather than indirectly through monetary policy. Had such a regime been in
force over the past decade, I believe that it could have significantly eased our present
troubles.

In conclusion, while lax global monetary policy probably played some part in the
credit build-up that is now painfully unwinding, it was only one of many parents.
And it is unrealistic to think that interest rates high enough to prevent that build-up
would not also have had a major depressing effect on activity. I think the real lesson
is that, alongside the many other regulatory improvements now under consideration,
we need a regulatory regime that works against the natural cyclical excesses of the
credit cycle. That would leave monetary policy free to be directed at where its
comparative advantage lies, namely achieving overall price stability.

9

