ANDREW BAILEY
KEYNOTE SPEECH TO
BSA ANNUAL CONFERENCE
5 MAY 2011

It is a great pleasure to be here today, at what is my first BSA
Annual Conference. It might help if I begin by explaining my
current role, because it is not entirely straightforward. Up
until the end of March I was an Executive Director at the
Bank of England, responsible for Banking Operations and the
resolution of problem banks, the latter including leading the
resolution of the Dunfermline Building Society - the only use
to date of the resolution powers given to the Bank of England
in 2009. It was all change for me at the end of March, and
since then I have been responsible for the supervision of
deposit takers at the FSA and Deputy Head of prudential
regulation there. This new role will, with the passage into
1

legislation of the Government’s reforms of financial
regulation, mean that I will be the Deputy Chief Executive of
the Prudential Regulation Authority. Our current expectation
is that the PRA will come into existence around the beginning
of 2013. Just to add a twist to the end, I am still attached to
the Bank of England, with responsibility for the programme of
work to create the PRA as a subsidiary of the Bank. Anyway,
enough of me as they say.
The last four years have taught me a lot of things as we have
gone through the problems of the financial crisis. One of the
things that I have enjoyed has been learning a lot more about
building societies. Occasionally, but mainly not so, the
process has been painful, as with Dunfermline, but always I
have felt that it has left me better educated. I have learned a
great deal from many people in the societies themselves, and
from my colleagues, one of whom sent me an extract from the
1870 edition of the Building Societies Gazette, in which the
author set out his views on the sorts of people to avoid having
on the board of a building society, namely:-

2

“men who have no experience in matters of business ….
crotchety men … men who cannot open their minds to any
view of a matter that does not originate with themselves …
men who love discussion for discussion’s sake … who love to
show off in the committee room …. ”
On the other hand, the qualifications of the Executive were
listed as to be:
“ a man thoroughly versed in some of the higher walks of
commercial arithmetic, and especially in the laws of
compound interest. It will often happen that his superior
knowledge must guide his committee or board, but such
guidance should be exercised to leave upon their minds the
satisfactory impression that the action has been their own.”
Nothing changes, I hear you say, except perhaps doing
compound interest in the head?
I want to talk today about the impact of the crisis on the
business of building societies and retail banking more
generally, and what it means for the future. Let me start with
3

the big question that I am asked most frequently about
building societies, namely what is my attitude towards
promoting diversity in the banking industry, and specifically
mutuals? I am in favour of promoting competition in the
banking industry, and with that greater diversity in the types
of organisations that provide banking services to the public.
But, as I will explain later, we need to be very careful what
we mean by promoting competition and diversity because
both need to be sustainable.
As far as mutuals are concerned, neither the FSA nor the Bank
of England can promote a particular model of doing business.
Our job is to promote the stability of the financial system,
which is the bedrock and the foundation of a healthy financial
sector, including mutuals. We can facilitate different business
models, and we should not put up unnecessary regulatory
barriers. I would also go a step further, as Hector Sant’s did
earlier this year in evidence to Parliament, and agree that
mutuals make an important contribution to the fabric of
society, including of course the provision of affordable
housing through lending that is priced appropriately for the
risk. This last point is perhaps obvious, but nonetheless
4

important. My job is to achieve and maintain the stability of
the financial system, but I am doing so in order to help to
realise on a sustainable basis, and I emphasise sustainable,
other important objectives of public policy such as enabling
people to afford housing.
Digging into these issues some more, I want to start on
competition in banking. This is of course the territory of the
Independent Commission on Banking chaired by Sir John
Vickers, and if you have not yet read their interim report, I
strongly recommend it. Competition in banking needs careful
assessment to understand the nuances. It is true that the UK
has a highly concentrated banking industry. At the end of last
year, the largest six banks in this country accounted for 69%
of lending to UK households, 68% of lending to UK
companies, and 78% of UK household deposits. The lending
numbers are more concentrated still looking at the flow of
lending to households last year. Those are the sort of headline
figures that are used to tell a story of lack of competition in
the industry, and in important respects that story is correct.
However, we need to reconcile that evidence with the causes
of the financial crisis, which in critical areas was a sorry tale
5

of reckless competition. One way to make this reconciliation
is with the rather obvious point that the crisis has left the
banking industry more concentrated than it was before 2007.
Beyond that, my assessment is that the crisis was fuelled by
unsustainable competition in important parts of the banking
industry, one of which was the provision of mortgages. There
is no doubt that in the years leading up to 2007, lending
margins were squeezed heavily in new mortgage provision,
and the volume of lending increased rapidly, supported in part
by the churning of re-mortgaging activity. For a while this
competition in the supply of mortgages looked good for
borrowers, but it was an unsustainable loss leader for the
lenders and it fuelled the rapid growth of household
indebtedness. Northern Rock was in many ways the extreme
bad example of this trend, with a business model that
squeezed margins, thus mispricing credit risk, and therefore
depended on taking a larger and larger share of new mortgage
lending to offset those low margins, and that volume was in
turn dependant on the continued openness of the securitisation
market. Two other fatal weaknesses were: first a dependence
on avoiding the trigger of the hard credit rating limit
embodied in the business model, which; second, was at odds
6

with the flow of lending at ever higher LTVs to sustain the
volume of activity.
This was competition of an unwanted sort. The consequences
could, and in the past would, have been a lot worse than they
have been an important reason for which is that the
establishment of monetary stability over the last two decades
has substantially attenuated the impact of the recession, a very
different story to the early 1990s and before.
But there are a number of important lessons from this
experience of what I would frankly call unstable competition
which are important for understanding the future diversity of
the industry, and the role of mutuals. First, I think that
demutualisation, as it developed, was a failed and very costly
experiment. It is a striking fact that no demutualised building
society exists today as an independent entity under private
ownership, and as we know a number lost their independence
in very costly ways which damaged the stability of the
financial system. At root, I think this outcome happened
because of their failure to adapt and create business models in
the PLC sector which fostered sustainable competition:
7

The second important lesson from this failed experiment was
the impact it had on the remaining building societies.
Demutualisation changed the profile of UK mortgage lending
radically. From 1997 – the peak of demutualisation – the bulk
of outstanding mortgages lay outside the mutual sector, for the
first time. This, perhaps inevitably, prompted a response from
the remaining building societies, which took the form of more
aggressive pricing of mortgage lending rates and deposit
account rates, thus squeezing net interest margins and rates of
return (which societies were happy to badge as “mutual
pricing”). It was a change in the ethos of societies. It would
have been good competition if it had been sustainable. For
some societies it was sustainable, a point I will come back to
later. But the result very much depended on how the change
in business model was managed and whether it was
compatible with the three critical constraints of any bank: the
level of capital that is truly loss bearing in the going concern
sense of the term, and the ease with which that capital can be
supplemented; the sustainability of funding; and the quality of
governance and management for the changed business model.

8

Two developments were important here. First, the squeezing
of lending margins was more difficult for building societies
because of their greater reliance on retained earnings to build
up Core Tier One, true loss bearing capital. This was a
critical weakness for those societies that took on more risk in
their lending portfolios. Second, squeezing margins meant
that there was pressure to expand balance sheets, and this
expansion had to be funded. This is the pressure generated by
greater leverage that was evident across the banking industry.
After 1997, in common with the rest of the mortgage market,
societies began to lean more heavily on the wholesale market
for funding. The wholesale funding stock of building
societies was around 20% in the first half of the 1990s , but
had risen to over 30% by 2000. The traditional building
society model of retail deposits funding overwhelmingly
prime mortgage lending had changed. For many societies the
transition was handled well, but for others if was not.
Dunfermline was unfortunately a very difficult case in point,
where an expansion into commercial property lending and
acquired mortgages originated outside the traditional lending
sector was frankly incompatible with the constraints that
existed on their business model.
9

What does this mean for the future of building societies? I do
not see that the developments of the last fifteen years make
the model unsustainable. But we do need to be careful what
we mean by sustainable. It is not a return to the conditions
prior to the onset of the crisis in 2007. The unsustainable
features for some institutions included: an excessive reliance
on unstable funding sources, which could be wholesale or
volatile retail deposits; dependence on capital instruments that
do not bear losses in a going concern state; purchasing assets
originated by others, where the incentives of the originator are
to sell the assets quickly rather than longer-term viability; and
excessive reliance on secured funding which encumbers too
many good quality assets to the detriment of unsecured
creditors.
What then does sustainability look like for building societies?
First, it needs to recognise the inherent constraint in being a
mutual on raising outside loss absorbing capital. A mutual
structure does not naturally lend itself to the introduction of
outside equity-like capital. That is a fact of life, and the
solution is not to substitute less good quality capital. It
10

creates a greater constraint on raising new capital as part of a
recovery plan if problems arise, and this means – as can be
seen – that the standing levels of capital in societies are higher
as insurance against the greater inflexibility of capital raising.
I appreciate that, notwithstanding the inherent constraint,
societies are keen to explore the possibility to issue a Core
Tier 1 instrument which is compatible with the new Basel 3
and European CRD4 requirements. For our part, the
authorities cannot, and should not, compromise on the
definition and quality of capital. We have seen the harm that
this can do. But, equally we must help to find good capital
structures that meet our objectives. This process is currently
at an early stage of negotiation, so the outcome is by no
means certain. The European Commission are due to adopt
the CRD4 Directive – which in layman’s terms means publish
a starting draft text – by the end of this summer (but note such
timing predictions can turn out to be a term of art). It is at this
point that the terms proposed will be properly in the public
domain. I cannot forecast how long it will then take to get
agreement on the CRD4 Directive, though it is set to be
implemented by the start of 2013. We are working closely
11

with the Government on the design and agreement of an
appropriate capital instrument for mutuals. It must be able to
absorb losses (i.e. be written down) prior to liquidation of the
issuer. Of course, I do have to say that to what extent there is
a market for such instruments, and at what price, is not
something that the authorities can legislate.
It is however very important not to get carried away with the
prospect of a new capital instrument. The building society
model means that you will naturally be more dependent on
retained earnings as the source of loss bearing capital. This
puts an emphasis on managing costs as a means to create
retained earnings, and retain a larger share of those earnings
to build capital than has been the case since the mid 1990s. A
feature of a number of the successful societies has been strong
and effective cost management which has improved returns.
This is not incompatible with the mutual ethos in my view,
though it does need to be consistent with the fair treatment of
customers, both savers and borrowers. There may be
unexploited opportunities for societies to work together to
reduce costs by sharing services and infrastructure for
instance. I think this is an issue for you to determine not the
12

authorities, though I would note that is happens in some other
countries.
Turning to funding, I think it is safe to predict that the
pressure on interest margins will not go away. In essence, we
have seen a switch from pressure driven by the asset side of
the balance sheet before the crisis broke (lending margins, as I
described earlier) to the liability side of the balance sheet
being the cause of pressure (funding costs). It is striking that
over half of new household deposits in the UK have recently
had a maturity greater than one year, compared with around
10% during the latter half of 2008. This is a natural response
to very low interest rates as savers seek to earn additional
return by lengthening the term of their deposits. And, even
though absolute rates are low, the spread of household deposit
rates relative to official interest rates has risen markedly.
Competition for retail deposits is intense as banks and
building societies compete to attract more stable funding. As
authorities, we do watch carefully whether the assumptions
that underpin the aggregated business plans of banks and
building societies amount to an unrealistic expectation of
retail deposit growth. I would say that it is a case of so far, so
13

good. What we have seen over the last year is a very
encouraging strengthening of funding by UK banks and
building societies which has enabled substantial progress to be
made in repaying the temporary support provided by the Bank
of England and the Government, with the first phase of
progress focussed on repayment of the SLS, with its earlier
end-date.
Competition for funding, and the impact on the cost of
funding has fed through to spreads on lending to households,
where the spreads on new lending have increased markedly
relative to the spreads on loans outstanding. We could debate
at length whether this is a product of demand or supply side
stories. More obviously, it is a product of maintaining
margins, which is necessary to support and rebuild capital
bases. Frankly, there is a very delicate balance to be struck
here between the essential bedrock of a stable financial
system and the necessary role of banks and building societies
to support the public policy goal of ensuring access to housing
on affordable terms. This is the historical role of building
societies, and one that in my view will continue.

14

Let me end by making two final points on the future of
building societies which in some ways hark back to the writer
in the Building Societies Gazette of 1870. A sustainable
sector requires good risk management systems, which enable
management to understand the risks inherent in their
businesses. Sadly, my involvement in resolving problems in
banks and building societies over the last four years has left
me with too many “war stories” where this was not the case.
The FSA has been working with individual societies over the
last couple of years or so to ensure that risk management
systems and capabilities are appropriate for the chosen model
of business and reflecting market conditions. To support this,
the FSA published the Building Societies Sourcebook which
sets out how a society can align its funding and credit risk
appetite with its risk management capabilities. The reviews
that societies have carried out themselves following the
publication of the sourcebook of their business model, risk
appetite and risk management capabilities have led in a
number of cases to either a modification of lending risk
appetite or to a strengthening of risk management to meet that
appetite.

15

Finally, human capital is of course important. The author of
the 1870 article advised avoiding crotchety men, and get a
chief executive who can do compound interest calculations in
his head. Perhaps the world has moved on a bit, though the
first piece of advice strikes me as a universal truth. It is
important that societies can attract and retain senior
management and board members of the right calibre. There
were undoubtedly failures of governance among the causes of
the crisis. It is not for the FSA to determine how institutions
should be run, but we do actively assess governance
structures, including the effectiveness of boards. This is an
important part of our role. Occasionally, we will have frank,
but I hope not crotchety, messages about governance.
In conclusion, I hope that building societies will continue to
play an important part in the fabric of our society. It is our
job to ensure that they can do so within an environment where
the financial system is stable. What that means for the
number of societies in the future is not something that the
authorities should dictate. We do not have a master plan to
reduce or increase the number of societies. That said, mergers
are part of your history. Frankly, having been involved in a
16

number of mergers that arose out of problems with one of the
parties, I have one wish for the future, namely that future
mergers are a matter of your choice rather than collective
necessity.
Thank you.

Words: 3,187

17

