Stability, Instability and Monetary Policy
Speech given by
Kate Barker, Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England

To Members of South London Business
12 March 2009

I would like to thank Charlotta Groth and Jake Horwood for research assistance, and others for helpful
comments. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of
England or other members of the Monetary Policy Committee.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Speeches by MPC members are frequently given on our travels away from London,
which is a good way to stress our role of responding to conditions in the whole
country. However, it is also vital to ensure we have enough contact with the London
business community – so thank you for providing this opportunity. It also gives me
the chance to comment on the strength and diversity of the London business
community; while 40% of London’s GDP came from the finance and business
services sector in 2006, I am always surprised to be reminded that London also
produces 10% of the UK’s manufacturing output (80% of this being in firms
employing fewer than ten people).

The financial sector of course is however where the present UK recession started, and
for the UK as a whole we are now towards the end of what is pretty clearly going to
be a second quarter in which national output falls very sharply. Although the latest
CIPS/Markit business surveys suggested new orders at least had picked up a little,
overall these and other business surveys remain at very weak levels. In the second
part of my remarks this evening, I will discuss the present situation and how monetary
policy is playing its role, alongside other measures, in building the conditions for
recovery.

But first I want to discuss what I believe to be one of the factors which contributed to
the present economic crisis, and in doing so address a question which business people
often raised during the more tranquil years of the MPC. I should stress at the outset
that this is intended as an account of only one of the factors which have led us into the
present crisis.

UK real interest rates – a historical perspective
Following the significant appreciation in sterling’s effective exchange rate in 1996/97,
many UK exporters became concerned about the loss of the competitiveness which
they had enjoyed in the period after sterling’s departure from the European Exchange
Rate Mechanism in autumn 1992. In the early years of the MPC, a frequent concern
expressed by our business contacts was that interest rates in the UK were too high
relative to our competitors (especially in the euro area), and that this both raised
firms’ costs and kept the exchange rate strong. As time went on, concerns about the

2

exchange rate were less often voiced, but the question of the UK’s relatively high
interest rates continued to be raised.

Of course, in the more turbulent conditions today, this is no longer top of anyone’s
worry list – indeed it is low interest rates for savers, which I will talk about later, that
are of concern. Indeed, more generally looking back it is now usually to argue that
interest rates globally were too low. But this exercise focuses on relative interest rates
and their potential role in the UK’s imbalances.

The general response to this concern is that UK policy rates are set to meet the UK’s
inflation target, and that the comparison with other countries is only relevant insofar
as it affects the likely path for the exchange rate and so the rate of imported inflation.
Certainly as far as the MPC period is concerned, the general proposition that the UK
policy rate has been set ‘too high’ can be countered readily by pointing to the success
on average in meeting the inflation target, rather than undershooting it. This broad
picture holds despite the recent increased volatility of inflation. But if this had been
achieved with short-term policy rates systematically higher than in other comparable
countries, there would then be a puzzle about why the UK needed higher rates to keep
inflation close to target.

What are the facts with regard to the UK’s interest rates, relative to elsewhere?
Looking back at the period before the current financial turmoil, Charts 1 and 2 show
ten-year bond rates, both nominal and real, across a number of major economies for
various periods since 1980. The big picture is that nominal bond rates have tended to
decline over time since the 1980s, whereas real bond rates remained high through
much of the 1990s1. For the UK, nominal rates were very close to the overall average
in all of these periods, but real rates over recent years have been a little higher.

1

The measurement of real rates is far from straightforward, since it requires a proxy for inflation
expectations. Here, the calculation uses the ex-post CPI over the year after the bond was issued.

3

Chart 1: Long-term nominal interest rates(a)
1980-2007
1980-1992
1993-1998
1999-2007

Per cent
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
Japan

Canada

Australia

N. Zealand

Italy

France

Germany

US

UK

0

Sources: Global Financial Database and Bank calculations.
(a) 10 year government bond. Dashed lines cross-country averages.

Chart 2: Long-term real interest rates(a)
1980-2007

1980-1992

Per cent

1993-1998

1999-2007

6
5
4
3
2
1

Japan

Canada

Australia

N. Zealand

Italy

France

Germany

US

UK

0

Sources: Global Financial Database, Thomson DataStream and Bank calculations.
(a) 10 year government bond. Real rates are ex-post calculated using annual CPI inflation in the year after the bond was issued.
Dashed lines cross-country averages.

Looking at short-term interest rates for these countries (Charts 3 and 4), the same
pattern of nominal rates generally falling across the time periods is observed, a trend
perhaps accounted for in part by the high level of Asian savings. UK nominal rates
have in fact been close to the (simple) average in all three time periods. However,
they have been a little above rates in both the US and most other major EU

4

economies. The UK’s real short-term rates on the other hand have been persistently
above the average, and notably so in the most recent period2. In addition, they have
been considerably above the real rates observed in both the US and in the euro area
countries included, and this is presumably what gave rise to some business concerns
during the MPC’s first decade.
Chart 3: Short-term nominal interest rates(a)
1980-2007
1980-1992
1993-1998
1999-2007

Per cent
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
Japan

Canada

Australia

N. Zealand

Italy

France

Germany

UK

US

0

Sources: Global Financial Database and Bank calculations.
(a) 3 Month Treasury bills. Dashed lines cross-country averages.

Chart 4: Short-term real interest rates(a)
1980-2007
1980-1992
1993-1998
1999-2007

Per cent
6
5
4
3
2
1

Japan

Canada

Australia

N. Zealand

Italy

France

Germany

US

UK

0

Cross-country interest rate differentials

2

The real rate is calculated using data on the three-month Treasury Bill, subtracting CPI inflation over
the duration of the bond as a proxy for inflation expectations

5

The underlying drivers of real interest rates are not well understood overall; indeed
Alan Greenspan famously described the fall in real long-term rates in the mid-2000s
as a conundrum3. In theory, once real expected changes in exchange rates have been
allowed for, risk-free long-term real interest rates should be equalised across countries
(as if they were not, then capital would flow to the country where interest rates were
higher until real rates were equalised). There may of course be risk premia in longterm real rates – for example arising from concerns about fiscal sustainability.

A further potential source of differences between countries comes from barriers to
capital mobility – such as legal and taxation differences. These have generally been
lessened in the recent past, and there has been some convergence in real bond yields,
although this is also likely to reflect greater convergence in economic performance.

Long-term rates are a function of the sequence of expected short-term rates, together
with a risk premium to reflect the fact that lending for longer periods is generally
judged to be inherently more risky. Clearly the same considerations apply to shortterm interest rates – namely that the real short-term rate, would be expected to be the
same across countries, once allowance has been made for expected changes in real
exchange rates.

These adjustments in real exchange rates are important, as they will tend to
compensate for changes in the economic outlook (for example, an improvement in the
relative growth rate) or for the fact that relative CPIs only imperfectly reflect the
appropriate inflation differentials for cross-country comparisons.

It is therefore exchange rate adjustments which bridge the apparent gap between this
approach to interest rates, which considers the international perspective, and the way
in which we normally talk about interest rates, in which policymakers describe their
activity as adjusting the short-term interest rate around the neutral4 interest rate in
response to changes in the estimated output gap and movements in expected inflation.
So before any conclusion can be reached about whether there is any remaining puzzle
3

Greenspan (2005)
The neutral rate is defined as the rate consistent with stable inflation when the economy is growing at
trend.

4

6

in the UK’s recent interest rate history, some simple modelling needs to be undertaken
to control for expectations of real exchange rate movements, and thereby ensure that it
is not simply differences in growth prospects or price indices which give rise to any
apparent puzzles in relative interest rates. In looking at this, the sample of countries
considered was expanded to 18 developed countries, and a ‘world interest rate’ was
calculated, over the period from mid-1985 to mid-2008, using a simple average of the
short-term interest rate from these countries.5 Prior to any allowance for exchange
rate expectations, the UK was found to be among a number of countries whose shortterm interest rates were significantly above this average.
A proxy for expectations of real exchange rate changes6 was able to explain some of
the variation in real interest rates across countries. However, there remained
unexplained persistent deviations in a number of countries7, including the UK (where
short-term real rates were above the average) and the US (below the average).

The remaining unexplained differences would generally be attributed to risk or
liquidity premia. So it is worth considering what might be expected to affect these.
One plausible factor with regard to liquidity premia is whether or not a country’s
currency acts as a reserve currency, because of the size and security of its financial
markets. It is not surprising, particularly in the light of the strong use by Asian
countries of the US as a home for their excess savings, that controlling for this factor8
helped explain why the US was below the global average throughout the period. But
it could not explain why UK rates were relatively high.

Being a reserve currency is not the only factor likely to contribute to any risk
premium. An additional consideration, which seems relevant both to the explanation
of the UK’s recent economic history, and to challenges for economic policy

5

An alternative approach using principal component analysis to calculate the world interest rate did not
change the conclusion
6
The proxy was calculated under the assumption that past values of economic variables are used to
form expectations about future real exchange rate movements – there may have been some temporary
distortions around the ERM period.
7
The analysis reported in the next few paragraphs is the preliminary outcome from work carried out
using panel data techniques. A forthcoming MPC Unit discussion paper by Groth and Zampolli will
discuss this in more detail
8
A fairly restrictive definition of a reserve currency was used – the US throughout the period,
Germany (to 1999) and the Euro (post-1999).

7

management in the future, is economic volatility. In a country where economic
conditions are relatively volatile, there would also tend to be a higher rate of savings,
as consumers are more concerned to build up financial buffers against periods of
unemployment. This higher rate of savings would tend to reduce the equilibrium real
interest rate9, as the risk premia on foreign assets means they are not a complete
substitute for domestic assets. Conversely, a less volatile economy would tend to
have a higher real interest rate.

To investigate whether relative economic volatility can play a role in explaining
interest rate differentials, a three year rolling average measure of volatility in
quarterly output growth was calculated.10 Chart 5 shows this measure of volatility for
the UK, the US and the 18 country average from 1985 to the start of the credit crisis.
This indicates there was a decline in economic volatility in the UK up to the mid1990s, and also that the UK was relatively stable over the period.
Chart 5: Volatility of GDP growth(a)
UK

Standard deviations

US
Average

1.2

(b)

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
1985

1989

1993

1997

2001

2005

Sources: Global Financial Database and Bank calculations.
(a) 3 year rolling average of standard deviation of quarterly GDP growth.
(b) The average includes UK, US, Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland.

9

De Paoli and Sondergaard (2009, forthcoming) model the theoretical link between real interest rate
differentials across countries, and relative economic volatility, through the latter’s impact on the risk
premium.
10
The variable was calculated as the three-year rolling average of the standard deviation of quarterly
GDP growth. Alternatives based on a five-year rolling average, or using household consumption
instead of GDP, were also estimated – and found to produce very similar results.

8

Incorporating this measure of volatility into the investigation of cross-country real
interest rate differentials, it was found that of the 18 developed countries studied, only
three now showed any unexplained persistent deviation from the world real rate,
Japan and Switzerland (whose rates were below the world rate) and New Zealand
(whose rate was above the world rate).

This exercise concludes that it is true that over the past twenty years real UK interest
rates tended to be a little higher, on average, than those prevailing in competitor
countries, even when exchange rate changes have been allowed for. One plausible
explanation for this difference is the relative economic stability of the UK, which
depressed domestic saving, at the same time as it pushed up the risk premia and so
real interest rates, and attracted flows of funding from aboard. In that sense, the long
period of economic growth post-1992, generally thought of as benign, may have
contributed to the increase in UK debt levels and higher interest rates.

The present global crisis is of course affecting almost all economies, and may in part
have its roots in a period of low global interest rates. But the period of relative
stability may have contributed to the UK now facing a situation in which the economy
needs to adjust to less foreign borrowing and a reduction in the current account
deficit, constraining domestic demand.

Current situation
This brings me to a consideration of the present economic situation, and how the
MPC alongside the Government, is responding. Already, it seems very likely that the
loss of output in this recession will exceed that of the early 1990s, but comparisons
with previous recent recessions may not be terribly helpful. This downturn is
different in a number of respects: the striking synchronicity of the weakness in the
global economy which emerged last autumn; the severe impairment of much of the
world’s financial system; and the fact that rather than being produced by the need to
fight high inflation, it has led to worries about deflation. As the financial crisis
intensified last autumn, strong global trade and financial linkages seem to have
combined with greater flexibility of labour and product markets than in the other post1970 recessions to bring about a very sharp decline in world output growth and trade.

9

When recovery comes, however, these same factors could result in a quite sharp pick
up in growth, at least initially.

It is clear that governments as well as central banks remain focused on tackling this
crisis with a range of policies aimed both at supporting the overall economic position
of their economies and at tackling the specific problems in the banking sector which
are holding back the supply of credit. In addition the fall in the oil price is a
beneficial factor, and for the UK the substantial depreciation of sterling (now well
over 25% since its most recent peak in July 2007) will support the substitution of
domestic production for imports as well as boosting exports when the global economy
recovers. As the MPC commented in the February Inflation Report, this all adds up to
a powerful stimulus.

Nevertheless, in February the MPC’s forecast for growth was very gloomy and in the
Inflation Report we indicated that the risk was of an even worse outcome. The
projections then implied that the UK economy faced a period of a significant degree
of spare capacity. Inflation pressures therefore would be strongly downward, even
after allowing for the impact of lower sterling pushing up on import prices, leaving
CPI below its 2% target.

Some UK economic news over the past month, while far from positive, has at least
been a little less bleak. The main business surveys have remained fairly stable, there
have been tentative signs of a little more activity in the housing market (although
house prices have fallen further) and retail sales appear to be holding up better than I
had expected. In addition, the first breakdown of GDP in the fourth quarter of 2008
suggested that there had already been a considerable reduction in stock levels in the
UK, accounting for almost 0.9 percentage points of the 1.5% fall in GDP. If this early
estimate proves reliable, then as destocking is likely to tail off this should support
output growth later this year. However, industrial production fell by more than
expected in January, and the labour market remains very weak, with employment
falling by 45,000 in the fourth quarter of 2008.

And the financial markets have seen renewed uncertainty – with equity prices in the
UK down around 12% since early February, including larger falls for the financial
10

sector. Latest data on the global economy have also been very downbeat, particularly
for some Asian economies – including a 10% fall in January for Japanese industrial
production. The negative impact of the crisis on the financial situation of much of
Central and Eastern Europe has intensified. So on balance, the economic outlook has
deteriorated further over the past month.

Policy response
Although the effects of the significant reduction in Bank Rate since last October have
yet to be fully felt, it is very likely, in view of the outlook described above, that this
monetary policy stimulus would fall well short of being sufficient to support the
economy, reduce the risks of a prolonged deflation, and bring inflation back to target.
For me, this conclusion was strengthened by the belief that, while the low level of
Bank Rate will continue to stimulate the economy, it seemed all too likely that as
Bank Rate has moved to historically low levels the impact of cuts has become
successively reduced.

One reason for this is the possible change in the behaviour of savers in this
historically unprecedented situation. Some recent commentary may have exaggerated
the plight of savers. With CPI inflation expected to move down towards 1%, from a
peak of 5.2% in September, Bank Rate has fallen less in real terms than in nominal.
However, many savers will not perceive this fully today, as they will be comparing
interest rates to the present CPI of 3%, rather than to the expected further fall in
inflation. (Inflation on the RPI basis is already much lower at 0.1%, but this has been
driven primarily by falls in mortgage rates and house prices, less likely to be factors
which are beneficial for older savers).

In addition, it is possible that some savers will suffer from a form of money illusion,
and be reluctant to run down their money savings significantly enough to maintain
their spending levels (even though at higher inflation rates, a saver spending all of
their interest income was effectively reducing the real value of their savings). The
very rapid decline in the Bank Rate itself may have increased a sense of uncertainty
among savers. Since one of the channels through which changes in the Bank Rate
affect the economy operates because savers are usually less responsive to changes in
their income than are borrowers, this suggests that the power of interest rate
11

reductions may be reduced when nominal rates are cut so far over such a short time
period.

And there is a further factor, which is the response of the financial institutions. Since
it is very difficult to pay savers negative interest rates, the last few interest rate cuts
have not been passed on fully to savers or borrowers. While this has enabled banks
and building societies to retain a margin between saving and borrowing rates, it has
also lessened the impact of Bank Rate cuts. For some mortgage lenders with a large
stock of tracker mortgages, lower interest rates have increasingly squeezed their
margins, potentially reducing their ability to increase lending in the future.

For these reasons, although there would still be aspects of the normal transmission
mechanism of monetary policy still in operation (especially through the exchange
rate, and through support for asset prices), I believed there was a much increased risk
of a perverse impact from cutting interest rates to 0.5%. However, the big picture was
that even if the 0.5 percentage point cut had had the more usual full impact, this
would have been an inadequate response to the prospective weakness of the real
economy and the consequent danger of inflation remaining below target. A change in
monetary policy tool was clearly required, which focuses on the quantity rather than
the price of money. And as part of this overall strategy, it was appropriate to take
Bank Rate closer to zero, to prevent too much of a gap opening up between Bank Rate
and the overnight money market rate, as the latter may drift toward zero as
quantitative easing gets underway. This could have encouraged the banks to
accumulate reserves, remunerated at Bank Rate, rather than increasing lending.

I strongly support the move to quantitative easing, and consider that once this became
necessary, it was important to act in a decisive manner. Although the timing of the
impact on the economy remains uncertain, there are a range of potential effects which
I will be looking at closely over the coming months to gauge the impact of the MPC’s
actions. These will include a flattening of the yield curve in the part of the gilts
market where purchases will take place, a reduction in the spreads on corporate bonds
directly to the extent that these are also purchased, and a positive impact on a range of
asset prices as the sellers of gilts and corporate assets to the Bank find they need to
readjust their portfolios away from their higher cash holdings. Importantly, to the
12

extent that the banks themselves gain higher money holdings, then there should also
be a benefit as this will be further support for increased lending growth. (It will not,
however, be easy to assess how far any improvement in lending conditions is due to
our action, or to other recent Government steps.)

While the scale and timing of these various impacts is uncertain, quantitative easing
should bring about a pick up from the present weakness in nominal spending,
supporting economic activity. Concerns about inflation expectations falling too far
should also be eased, and together these factors should push CPI inflation back
towards the 2% target, after a period below target in the near term.

Conclusion
In the first part of this speech, I examined the question of how far it was true that UK
real short-term rates were relatively high during the period (compared with the
generally low level of global rates) since inflation targeting began post-1992. It was
concluded that even allowing for the impact of expected real movements in exchange
rates, UK rates were on average a little higher than the average for other developed
countries. In part, this could be explained by the UK’s relative economic stability,
which reduced precautionary savings and through a higher risk premia on UK assets
increased real interest rates as funding needed to be attracted from abroad.
In a speech in 200511, I discussed the fact that macroeconomic volatility had not led to
greater stability for firms’ individual performance. However, for individuals an
economy which overall grew quite steadily and added to jobs (numbers in
employment rose by an average of 1.0% per year between 1993 and 2007, and the
unemployment rate fell from 10.4% to 5.4% over the same period), meant that firm
volatility did not result in household insecurity. Chart 6 indicates that since the mid1990s, households have been relatively positive about their own financial position,
even when they have been more concerned about the economy overall.

11

This was discussed more thoroughly in Parker (2006).

13

Chart 6: Indicators of consumer confidence (a)
Balance

30

Personal financial situation

20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
-40

General economic situation

-50
-60
1988

1993

1998

2003

2008

Source: GfK NOP
(a) The GfK survey asks respondents how they expect their personal financial situation and the general economic situation to
evolve over next 12 months.

Economic stability may encourage greater risk-taking, but the policy conclusion can
hardly be that we should aim to avoid periods of economic stability in the future.
Many challenges for policymakers are emerging from the present economic turmoil.
In the future, there may well be efforts to devise measures to manage the overall
growth of credit, and to ensure financial institutions take on less overall risk than in
the immediate past. But it is not entirely easy to devise sound policies to prevent
individual households from taking on more risk during stable periods, due to their
misperceptions of the long-term outlook. The implication may therefore be that the
public sector would also need to move to a stronger financial position in times of
stability than appears justified just in terms of the public finances – in order that it can
provide support to the private sector when the inevitable economic shocks occur.

Today however the economic problems are those of instability, and the UK is in much
more troubled waters. The evidence over the last month was of more pronounced
weakness in the global economy, and of fragility in the financial markets. This
suggested that the downside risks to growth, and therefore to inflation, identified in
the February Inflation Report were in danger of crystallising. I believe that the
MPC’s significant move to increase the money supply will help to support the
economy through this difficult period, and that it is the best course in order to achieve

14

our objective of keeping inflation to target in the medium term. Of course, I
recognise that at some point this stimulus may need to be unwound, possibly rapidly,
to avoid an overshooting of inflation – and remain equally committed to acting as
necessary to prevent this.

I am aware, however, that very low Bank Rate has adverse effects both for savers, and
for some financial institutions. While it is not unusual for changes in Bank Rate to
have differential impacts throughout the economy, the recent significant reductions
may mean that at present these differences are unusually marked. But in reaching our
decision last week, the MPC had to weigh these adverse effects against the potential
costs of inaction in terms of lower growth, an even sharper rise in unemployment and
the risk of deflation. This should eventually benefit all parts of the economy,
including savers.

In continuing to take steps to move the economy back towards growth I am aware that
it will not be easy to boost confidence, particularly as over the next few months
unemployment, which reached 6.3% at the end of 2008, is likely to rise further. But
in showing determination to stick to our job of keeping inflation at target I consider
this should provide reassurance that, alongside other policymakers, the MPC is
working to limit the social and economic costs of the recession.

References:

Greenspan, A (2005) Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan before the Committee
of Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs, US Senate, February 16.

De Paoli, B and Sondergaard, J (2009) ‘Foreign exchange rate risk in a small open
economy’ Bank of England Working Paper - forthcoming

Parker, M (2006) ‘Diverging Trends in Aggregate and Firm-Level Volatility in the
UK’ Bank of England External MPC Unit Discussion Paper No 16.
15

