Structural change, global R* and
the missing-investment puzzle
Supporting paper for a speech by Andrew Bailey at the Official
Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum
July 2022

Andrew Bailey, Ambrogio Cesa-Bianchi, Marco Garofalo, Richard Harrison,
Nick McLaren, Sophie Piton and Rana Sajedi

Structural change, global R* and the missing-investment
puzzle
Supporting paper for a speech by Andrew Bailey at the Official Monetary
and Financial Institutions Forum
Andrew Bailey, Ambrogio Cesa-Bianchi, Marco Garofalo, Richard Harrison,
Nick McLaren, Sophie Piton and Rana Sajedi(1)
Abstract
The world has undergone substantial structural change over recent decades, with profound
implications for the long-run policy landscape. We focus on two key trends. First, the secular
decline in risk-free interest rates, suggesting a fall in the long-run global equilibrium interest
rate, Global R*. Using a structural model, we find that declining productivity growth and
increasing longevity played the largest roles in explaining this fall. The second trend is the
recorded weakness in investment, despite an increasing wedge between the return on capital
and the risk-free rate. We use industry-level data for the United Kingdom to investigate the
potential structural factors behind this ‘missing-investment puzzle’, and find a strong role for
intangible capital.
Key words: Structural change, equilibrium interest rates, investment.
JEL classification: E22, E43, J11.

(1) The authors are grateful to Saba Farooq and Alison Schomberg for outstanding research assistance, and to
Jonathan Haskel, Sara Holttinen, Peter Goodridge, Josh Martin and Marko Melolinna for their help with the data
on intangibles as well as insightful discussions. We would also like to thank Saleem Bahaj, Stuart Berry,
Alan Castle, Maren Froemel, Andy Haldane, Clare Macallan, Catherine L. Mann, Huw Pill, Lukasz Rachel,
Michael Saunders, Martin Seneca, Fergal Shortall, Sophie Stone, James Talbot, Silvana Tenreyro and
Gavin Wallis for comments and suggestions.
Please cite as: Bailey, A, Cesa-Bianchi, A, Garofalo, M, Harrison, R, McLaren, N, Piton, S and Sajedi, R (2022),
‘Structural change, global R* and the missing-investment puzzle’. Supporting paper for a speech by
Andrew Bailey, Bank of England, July 2022.
Bank of England, Threadneedle Street, London, EC2R 8AH
Email: enquiries@bankofengland.co.uk
© Bank of England 2022

1

Introduction

Monetary policy must respond to a multitude of exogenous forces. Many of those
forces have a very visible and direct effect on the outlook for output and inflation over
the short and medium term. Others, however, are manifestations of much longerterm structural changes that unfold over many decades. This paper focuses on these
longer-term trends and their effects on the broader landscape in which monetary
policy operates.
The world has undergone substantial structural change over recent decades. One
such example is population ageing: in the United Kingdom, the life expectancy of
a 65 year old woman in 1950 was around 80 years old. By 2015 the equivalent life
expectancy was close to 86. Moreover, this 6-year increase in life expectancy was
not unusual in the global context: the equivalent figures for Germany, Italy and Japan
are 7, 8 and 10 years, respectively. Another example is technological change: firms
are increasingly moving away from using physical capital, like machinery, equipment
and computer hardware, towards intangible capital, like R&D, software and branding.
Intangible capital made up 65% of UK firms’ investment in the mid-1990s, and this
is now 75%, an increase of 10 percentage points. We see similar increases in the
United States, Japan and Germany, of 8, 7 and 10 percentage points, respectively.1
This widespread structural change has profound effects on the economy, and the
broader landscape that policymakers navigate. Of particular relevance to monetary
policy, are the effects of structural forces in shaping the long-run trends in key variables
such as output, investment and real interest rates.
For example, one of the most striking global trends is the well-documented secular
decline in risk-free real interest rates, which suggests that there has been a decline in
the long-run global trend equilibrium interest rate. This is the long-run trend around
which the domestic equilibrium interest rate of an open economy, like the United
Kingdom, will fluctuate. We refer to this long-run global trend real rate as Global R∗ .
In this paper, we first explore the effect of structural changes, such as demographic
trends and technological change, on Global R∗ . To do so, we employ a structural
model of the world economy, in which we purposefully abstract from shorter-term
cyclical influences on the equilibrium real interest rate. Among the five potential forces
that we consider, we find that the decline in Global R∗ has primarily been driven by
1

Data on life expectancy is from UN World Population Prospects 2019. Data on intangibles is from
the 2022 vintage of EU KLEMS. See Appendix A.1 for more details.

3

the slowdown in productivity growth and population ageing. The effects of these
mechanisms are expected to persist going forward.
The long-run decline in the risk-free interest rate is only part of the story, however.
A recent literature has emerged showing that the rate of return on capital has not
been declining alongside the risk-free rate. In standard economic theory, the wedge
between these two rates of return is a key determinant of firms’ investment, itself an
important factor for the policy landscape, which, over the long run, has implications
for productivity and output. In particular, we would expect the observed rise in this
wedge to be coupled with a rise in investment. However, no such investment boom
has been recorded across high-income countries over recent decades.
We refer to this observed weakness in investment, despite a growing wedge between
the return on capital and the risk-free rate, as the “missing-investment puzzle”. To
understand the structural forces at play, we investigate several candidate explanations
for this puzzle, using industry-level data for the United Kingdom. Our results suggest
a strong role for intangible investment. Indeed, when accounting for missing intangibles,
in both investment and the measure of the return on capital, the missing-investment
puzzle in the United Kingdom is substantially reduced in recent years.
Finally, given their important role in explaining the trends in investment, we extend our
analysis to understand the potential impact of intangibles on long-run productivity.
While intangibles can explain the UK missing-investment puzzle, they may have
driven the concurrent productivity puzzle: industries with highest intangibles intensity
have contributed the most to declining labour productivity in the United Kingdom since
the global financial crisis.
Our results have important implications for the long-run policy landscape. First, our
structural model suggests that both productivity growth and demographic trends have
led to permanently lower Global R∗ . This means that, without significant reversals in
these structural trends, or the emergence of new long-run structural forces pushing in
a different direction, Global R∗ is expected to remain low. Second, intangible capital
appears to account for a significant part of “missing” investment in recent years,
suggesting that there has not been a structural missing-investment puzzle in the
United Kingdom. However, we should be cautious about the impact of the intangible
economy on the broader policy landscape, since intangible-intensive industries appear
to have contributed to the recent productivity puzzle. It is important to understand
why this may be, and the underlying challenges raised by an intangible-intensive
economy.
4

The rest of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2 shows our analysis of the
equilibrium real interest rate, and the path of Global R∗ over recent decades. Section
3 discusses the missing-investment puzzle, and the role of intangibles. Section 4
concludes.

Global R∗

2

This section explores the dynamics of Global R∗ – the long-run global trend equilibrium
real interest rate – over recent decades.
We first describe a simple approach to characterise the forces that act on equilibrium
real interest rates at different horizons. We then set out the underlying framework
for long-run interest-rate determination, laying out the key factors that can drive the
dynamics of the trend real rate. We summarise the results of Cesa-Bianchi et al.
(2022), hereafter referred to as CHS, who use a general equilibrium life-cycle model
to quantify the impact of each of the drivers. Finally, we discuss how these results
relate to the recent literature on demographics and inequality.

2.1

Equilibrium Real Interest Rates

The ‘equilibrium’ or ‘neutral’ real interest rate is usually defined as the real interest
rate required to close the output gap and sustain the inflation rate at its target. In
principle, therefore, the equilibrium real interest rate can be a useful guide for monetary
policymakers.2
The equilibrium interest rate cannot be directly observed, and must be estimated.
Such estimates are typically highly uncertain and so are not used as a mechanical
guide to monetary policy.3 Nevertheless, in the longer run, estimates of the equilibrium
real interest rate, and the factors driving it, can help to explain the evolution of interest
rates over the past and provide an indication of the outlook over coming years.
A simple framework for analysing the equilibrium real interest rate, r∗ , is to decompose
2

When shocks create a trade-off between stabilising inflation at target and closing the output gap,
the equilibrium real interest rate is less useful as a guide for policy.
3
See Fiorentini et al. (2018) for a detailed discussion of the uncertainty around estimates of
equilibrium interest rates.

5

it into a long-run, or trend, component, R∗ , and a shorter-term component, s∗ :4
r∗
|{z}

=

R∗
|{z}

+

s∗
|{z}

Equilibrium

Trend

Shorter-term

real interest rate

real rate

component

In this framework, r∗ fluctuates as a result of shorter-term influences on the economy,
s∗ . These influences include cyclical shocks to both aggregate demand and supply as
well as the effects of financial shocks.5
However, over the longer term, these fluctuations occur around the trend real rate, R∗ ,
which can change in response to long-run structural forces. Importantly, for an open
economy like the United Kingdom, the trend real rate will ultimately be determined by
global forces, because frictions that impede the free international movement of capital
are weaker over the long run. This implies that it is the global trend real interest rate,
Global R∗ , that acts as a long-term anchor for the UK’s domestic equilibrium real
interest rate. As such, the focus of this paper will be on Global R∗ .
The above framework suggests that Global R∗ can be measured as a common trend
component, within a trend-cycle decomposition of data from a cross-section of countries.
Figure 1 shows such an estimate from CHS, obtained by applying the methodology
of Del Negro et al. (2019) to a panel of 31 high-income countries from 1900-2015.6
Between 1900 and 1930, Global R∗ is estimated to have been relatively stable at
around 2%. After falling during the WW2 period, Global R∗ rose again between 1950
and 1980, reaching a peak of close to 2.5% in the late 1970s. Thereafter, Global R∗
declined steadily and is estimated to have been close to 0% in recent years. Though
there are relatively wide error bands around this central estimate, and the alternative
estimates, also reported in Figure 1, exhibit different patterns, there is robust evidence
of a steady decline in Global R∗ , especially in recent decades.
However, these reduced-form empirical estimates do not tell us why Global R∗ has
declined. Understanding the relative importance of the different secular factors that
drive Global R∗ requires a general-equilibrium structural model. With this in mind, we
now lay out the key factors that determine the real interest rates in a neo-classical
framework.
4

This framework was laid out in Bank of England (2018).
For example, the analysis in Bank of England (2018) assesses that during the global financial
crisis, headwinds to demand (including heightened uncertainty and tighter financial conditions)
prompted a large drop in s∗ , which took many years to dissipate.
6
See Appendix A.1 for details.
5

6

Figure 1: Empirical Estimates of Global R∗
Per cent
6

6

Hamilton et al. (2016)

Holston et al. (2017)

4
2
0
-2

4
2

Del Negro et al. (2019)

0

Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2022)
1900

20

40

60

80

2000

-2

Source: Consumer prices indices, short-term interest rates and government bond yields for the
calculation of the Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2022) measure from the Jordà et al. (2017) Macrohistory
Database and Eikon Refinitiv. Del Negro et al. (2019), Hamilton et al. (2016) and Holston et al. (2017).

2.2

Interest-Rate Determination

As laid out above, the trend real rate, R∗ , is the long-run equilibrium real interest rate.
As such, it corresponds to the real interest within a long-run model: a model that
abstracts from both shocks and frictions that pertain to cyclical fluctuations.
In the neo-classical framework, the real interest rate, R∗ , is the price that ensures
equilibrium in the capital market. Figure 2 provides a graphical representation of this,
by depicting the two sides of this market: firms and households.
Figure 2: Interest-Rate Determination
R*

Aggregate wealth from
household optimisation,
net of government debt

Firm choice of capital
for use in production
Capital-output ratio

7

Firms Firms require capital to produce, and R∗ corresponds to the rate at which
firms can borrow to finance investment. The marginal cost of each unit of capital,
then, will be determined by this borrowing cost, R∗ , adjusted for the effects of depreciation.
Profit maximisation implies that a firm will choose the capital-output ratio that sets the
marginal product of capital equal to this marginal cost. If the cost of borrowing falls
below the return on capital, firms will be incentivised to borrow in order to invest in
capital. The rise in borrowing will raise borrowing rates, and the rise in investment
will reduce the marginal return on additional capital, because of diminishing marginal
returns, until equilibrium is restored when the two are equalised.
This optimisation, along with the diminishing marginal returns to capital, implies that
a higher value of R∗ will induce the firm to choose a lower capital-output ratio. This
leads to the downward-sloping orange line in Figure 2.
Households Capital also provides a way for households to accumulate and store
wealth.
Given their stream of income over their life-cycle, each household will optimally accumulate
wealth to smooth consumption and maximise their utility. R∗ is the return that the
households earn on each unit of wealth. Aggregate wealth in the economy is the sum
of per-capita wealth across households.
Within this simple framework, we can consider two ways to store wealth: government
bonds and productive capital. As long as the return that the household receives
on each of these is the same, households will be indifferent about which they hold,
and their optimal behaviour will determine their total wealth, rather than how it is
allocated.7 Assuming that the quantity of government debt is determined by the
government’s budget constraint, and does not depend on the interest rate, households’
holdings of capital is determined by the fact that aggregate wealth must be equal to
total government bonds plus capital.
This behaviour typically implies that households will hold more wealth when the return,
R∗ , is higher.8 This is shown in the upward-sloping blue line in Figure 2.
7

More precisely, this is true so long as the risk-adjusted returns on different assets are the same,
however this simple framework abstracts from risk.
8
In general, this will depend on a number of specific assumptions about household preferences and
life-cycle income, and, in some cases, households may hold less wealth as the rate of return falls. The
exposition here only requires that, if this is the case, then the effect is not too strong. Specifically, we
require that the blue line in Figure 2, if negatively sloped, is steeper than the orange line. Alternative
modelling approaches can also lead to an upward-sloping line as the one presented here – see for
example Aiyagari-Bewley-Huggett models, or the model in Moll et al. (2021).

8

The precise positions of these two lines will depend on several factors, which we can
separate into two groups. The first group consists of the parameters of the model,
which do not change over time. The second group is the structural factors that may
vary over time, and therefore drive the dynamics of R∗ .
In particular, CHS consider five key drivers: productivity growth, population growth
and longevity (which together capture population ageing), government debt, and the
price of capital goods relative to consumption goods. The mechanisms through which
each driver affects R∗ can be seen through their effects on the position of the two
lines in Figure 2.
Productivity Growth: A decline in productivity growth causes the marginal product
of a given capital-output ratio to fall, shifting the orange line to the left. All else equal,
this lowers both R∗ and the capital-output ratio in equilibrium.
Population Ageing: A change in the population age distribution towards older
generations, due to either a decline in population growth rates or an increase in
longevity, raises aggregate household wealth. This is driven by two effects. First,
households expecting to live longer will optimally want to accumulate more wealth
to finance consumption during a longer retirement. Second, since, in the data, older
households are, on average, wealthier than younger households, a rise in the share
of older households in the population also increases aggregate wealth.9 This shifts
the blue line to the right: for a given R∗ , the aggregate wealth of households rises. All
else equal, this lowers R∗ and increases the capital-output ratio in equilibrium.
Government Debt: For a given level of aggregate wealth, a rise in the quantity of
government debt lowers household capital holdings. As described above, in equilibrium,
household wealth must equal government bonds plus capital, so that the quantity
of capital held by households is found by subtracting the quantity of government
debt from aggregate wealth. Therefore, if a larger portion of wealth is allocated to
government debt, households’ holdings of capital declines for all values of R∗ . This
shifts the blue line to the left. All else equal, this raises R∗ and pushes down on the
capital-output ratio in equilibrium.
Relative Price of Capital: The effect of a change in the relative price of capital on
the firm’s optimal capital-output choice will depend on the elasticity of substitution
9

In the quantitative exercise, CHS calibrate the life-cycle profile of wealth to match this empirical
fact. These mechanisms are explored at greater length in Lisack et al. (2021).

9

between capital and labour. Empirical estimates point to complementarities between
the factors of production, so that a decline in the relative price of capital will lead to a
decline in the optimal capital-output ratio.10 This shifts the orange line to the left. All
else equal, this lowers both R∗ and the capital-output ratio in equilibrium.

2.3

Decomposing the Drivers of Global R∗

While the qualitative effects of the key drivers of equilibrium interest rates can be
understood from the simplified framework considered above, a richer structure is
required to uncover their quantitative importance.
For that, we draw on the work of CHS, who use a general-equilibrium life-cycle model
to provide a structural interpretation of the evolution of Global R∗ in response to this
set of drivers.
Quantitative Model CHS consider a model of the world as a single large (closed)
economy, populated by overlapping generations of finitely-lived households. The
model is calibrated so that each time period corresponds to five years, and therefore
captures the effects of slow-moving trends, abstracting from business-cycle fluctuations.
Consistent with the five-year timing assumption, the model includes fourteen cohorts
of households, from age 20-24 to 85-89.
Using data for a panel of 31 high-income countries from 1950 to 2015, they derive
the common global trend in each of the five key drivers.11 These paths for the drivers
are then fed through the model as exogenous processes driving the dynamics of the
equilibrium. The model is simulated using a novel recursive approach that captures
slow-moving beliefs about long-term trends, which is particularly relevant as the
simulations span sixty years of substantial structural change. This results in an estimate
of the decline in Global R∗ , and a decomposition of the contribution of each driver.
The results of these simulations depend on the estimated path of these drivers, as
well as the parameters that determine the shape, slopes and positions of the lines in
Figure 2. To capture this uncertainty, CHS carry out sensitivity analysis, considering
alternative estimates of the path of the drivers, and alternative values of the key
10

This effect applies to the value of the capital-output ratio (that is, accounting for the change in
the price), which is what is shown in the figure. It is driven by the fact that the substitution towards
the now-cheaper factor of production is not sufficiently large to offset the decline in its price, due to
complementarities. These mechanisms are explored at greater length in Sajedi and Thwaites (2016).
11
In the five-year model period, the next time period would be 2020. However, they exclude any data
from 2020 to avoid the large movements induced by the Covid-19 shock. See Appendix A.1 for more
details.

10

Table 1: Change in Global R∗ from 1985
Empirical Model
1985–2015

Median
-1.9

5%–95%
(-2.4, -1.3)

Structural Model
1985–2015

Baseline
-1.9

Range
(-3.3, -1.1)

Of which:
Productivity growth
Population growth
Longevity

-0.9
-0.1
-1.0

(-1.2, -0.3)
(-0.5, -0.0)
(-1.8, -0.8)

Long run

-2.9

(-4.3, -1.8)

Note: For the empirical model, the table reports the median estimates of Global R∗
together with the 95 percent posterior intervals (five-year averages of annual data). For
the structural model, the table reports the estimate of R∗ in the baseline simulation,
together with the minimum and maximum across the sensitivity tests.
Source: Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2022).

parameters. The simulations are repeated under random combinations of these
alternatives, to create a range of potential paths for R∗ .
Declining Global R∗ Table 1 shows the resulting changes in Global R∗ , between
1985 and 2015, comparing across the empirical estimates shown in Figure 1 and the
structural model.12
We see that Global R∗ declines by 1.9 percentage points in both the baseline structural
model simulation, and the median empirical estimate. In the model, this ranges from
1.1 to 3.3 percentage points across the alternative simulations in the sensitivity tests,
which encompasses the 95% confidence interval around the empirical estimate.
Hence there is a robust finding of a decline in Global R∗ over this period, despite the
uncertainty about the size of the decline.
Decomposing the Drivers The structural model also allows us to decompose
this decline in Global R∗ into the contribution of each of the five drivers described
above. The full decomposition is provided in CHS. As they show, this fall has primarily
been driven by changes in productivity growth and population ageing. For brevity, we
therefore focus on these key drivers.
12

Since the model periods correspond to five years, ‘1985’ means an average of 1981-1985. For
comparison, we use the same definition in the empirical model.

11

The individual contributions of these drivers is shown in the lower panel of Table
1. We see that productivity growth contributed around half of the decline in Global
R∗ in the baseline, and robustly leads to a significant decline across the alternative
simulations.
Amongst the two demographics factors, population growth has a small contribution
of 0.1 percentage points in the baseline simulations over this time period, though
the sensitivity results suggest that the effect could be as large as 0.5 percentage
points. Conversely, the key demographic factor is the rise in longevity. This has a
large contribution to the decline in Global R∗ both in the baseline and across the
alternative simulations.
Long-Run Impact While the estimates of the path of the underlying drivers end
in 2015, the simulations continue past this date until the model has settled at a new
steady state. This is particularly important for the impact of the demographic variables,
as the age distribution continues to adjust after population growth rates and mortality
rates stop changing. The final row of Table 1 shows that the long-run decline in Global
R∗ is 2.9 percentage points, implying a further 1 percentage point decline from 2015.

2.4

Comparing Our Results to the Recent Literature

Ageing and the Baby Boom We have shown that population ageing played an
important role in the decline in Global R∗ over recent decades, and this impact is
expected to persist going forward. Importantly, the model does not predict that the
retirement of the ‘baby-boom generation’, which roughly begins in 2015, will lead to
significant upward pressure on Global R∗ .
This is in contrast to the points raised in Goodhart and Pradhan (2020). Lisack et al.
(2021) use a modelling strategy similar to CHS, focusing on the impact of population
ageing, and explore in more detail why the conclusions are different. Here we review
the key reasons.13
First, we include not only changes in population growth, which account for the baby
boom, but also increasing longevity. As we showed, longevity is a much larger driver
of population ageing, and therefore Global R∗ . Unlike the baby boom, which is a
transitory shock to population growth rates that fades out as those cohorts exit the
population, rising longevity is not expected to reverse.
13

These points are also explored in Blanchard (2022) and Vlieghe (2021).

12

Second, one of the key factors behind this result is the empirical finding that retirees
continue to hold high levels of wealth.14 While retirees do dissave, this behaviour is
not strong enough to materially lower their stock of wealth, which we have seen is
what matters for determining the interest rate. Put differently, while the mechanism
explored by Goodhart and Pradhan (2020), with respect to the retirement of the babyboom generation, is captured in our framework, it is quantitatively small in comparison
to the large and permanent impact of population ageing.
Inequality and Other Missing Drivers The modelling framework in CHS brings
together five important structural drivers of Global R∗ , and decomposes their relative
contributions. However, there are several potential additional factors that drive Global
R∗ that are not captured by these simulations. CHS discuss these at greater length,
noting that the net effect of the missing drivers is ambiguous.
Nonetheless, one important missing driver bears more discussion: inequality. A rise
in inequality could potentially affect R∗ through two main channels: higher precautionary
savings caused by higher individual income risk (Auclert and Rognlie, 2018); or
changes in the composition of the population towards high-income households, who
have the highest savings rates. Mian et al. (2021) show that this latter channel has
significantly increased aggregate wealth in the United States in recent decades,
consistent with the decline in R∗ . Taking these channels into account is likely to
contribute to further downward pressure on R∗ .
In contrast to our finding on the importance of demographics, Mian et al. (2021)
further argue that demographic trends play a smaller role in the increase in aggregate
wealth in the United States, relative to rising inequality. They reach this conclusion
by comparing the variation in the savings rates and the evolution of income shares,
across different income quantiles and across different age groups, showing that the
variation across age groups is too small to account for the large observed trend in
aggregate wealth. They focus their analysis of demographics on 45-64 year olds,
which they identify as the age group with the highest savings rates. One implication of
this is that they abstract from longevity and the high wealth levels of retirees, thereby
effectively considering only the impact of population growth rates, and the baby boom
in particular. In this sense, their finding of a small contribution from this demographic
trend is consistent with our results. However, our results further illustrate that increasing
longevity has a larger impact on aggregate wealth and therefore R∗ .
14

Lisack et al. (2021) show this in US household survey data, while Auclert et al. (2021) show that
this pattern holds across a larger set of countries.

13

3

The Missing-Investment Puzzle

The analysis so far has focused on the decline in R∗ , motivated by the secular decline
in risk-free interest rates. However, this is only part of the story. In this section, we
show that risk-free rates do not appear to have comoved with the return on capital.
We then explore what this means for investment, through the lens of a “missinginvestment puzzle”. We end the section with a discussion of the implications of these
findings on the policy landscape, in particular on productivity.

3.1 R∗ vs. the Return on Capital
As laid out in Section 2, in a neo-classical framework, firms’ optimisation equalises
the marginal cost of capital to its marginal return. In our stylised framework in Section
2.2, we assumed R∗ was equal to the marginal cost of capital, adjusted for depreciation,
and therefore equal to the return on capital in equilibrium. The quantitative model of
CHS, used in Section 2.3, does allow for a wedge between the two, capturing the
costs of financial intermediation, but assumes that it is fixed over time. Therefore, in
that framework, R∗ comoves with the return on capital.
However, in recent decades, risk-free rates and the return on capital do not appear
to comove in the data.15 Figure 3 plots the return on capital and risk-free rates for a
group of high-income countries since the 1970s. Following the literature, we define
the return on capital as the gross operating surplus (the output of the firm minus their
labour costs and capital depreciation), per unit of capital, adjusted for capital gains.16
Figure 3(a) shows that this measured rate of return on capital for the market sector
has remained stable over recent decades, with a drop around the time of the global
financial crisis, much of which has now recovered. Over the same period, across the
same group of countries, the risk-free rate, measured as the ex-post real rate of return
on 10-year government bonds, shown in Figure 3(b), rose until the 1980s, and has
since declined.
The change in the wedge between these two rates of return is plotted in Figure 4,
relative to 1971. We can see that it has a U-shaped pattern: the wedge declines
from the 1970s until the 1980s, and then rises materially from the 1990s. Even for
the United Kingdom, which has shown a smaller rise in the wedge compared to the
average, shown in the orange line, the wedge has risen by roughly 7 percentage
points since the trough in 1992. As discussed above, unlike in the data, the equivalent
15
16

Caballero et al. (2017) and Reis (2021) also show this for US data.
See Appendix A.2 for full details of the data definitions used.

14

Figure 3: Return on Capital vs. Risk-Free Rates
(a) Return on capital has been relatively stable
Per cent
18

18

25–75 percentile

12

12

UK

6
0

6

High-income countries median
1970

78

86

94

2002

0

10

(b) Risk-free returns have fallen since the late 1980s
Per cent
10

High-income countries median

10

5

5

0
-5
-10

0

UK

-5

25–75 percentile
1970

78

94

86

2002

10

-10

Note: High-income countries include Finland, Italy, Netherlands, Spain and the United Kingdom.
Figure A.3 in Appendix shows that this result is true for a larger sample of countries from 1987. See
Appendix A.2 for data definitions.
Source: Authors’ calculations using EU KLEMS, the Penn World Table 10.0 and the Jordà et al. (2017)
Macrohistory Database. See Appendix A.1 for more details.

measure of the wedge in the structural model is stable over time, as shown in the
yellow lines in Figure 4.17
To understand the importance of this wedge, we relate it to one of the key variables
that shapes the policy landscape: investment.
Note that, although the difference between R∗ and the rental rate of capital is assumed to be fixed
in the model, changes in the relative price of capital lead to small fluctuations in the line in the figure,
since the return on capital is measured consistently with the data.
17

15

Figure 4: Wedge Between Return on Capital and Risk-free Rates (1971=0)
Percentage points
10

25–75 percentile

High-income countries median

0

10

Model

-10

-10
-20

0

UK
1970

78

86

94

2002

10

-20

Note: High-income countries include Finland, Italy, Netherlands, Spain and the United Kingdom. All
lines show the wedge between the return on capital and the risk-free rate, as shown in Figure 3, as
an index with 1971=0. See Appendix A.2 for data definitions. The yellow lines replicates the same
definition in the baseline model simulations of Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2022).
Source: Authors’ calculations using EU KLEMS, the Penn World Table 10.0 and the Jordà et al. (2017)
Macrohistory Database. See Appendix A.1 for more details.

3.2

Missing Investment

In standard economic theory, the wedge shown in Figure 4 is a measure of firm
profitability.18 As such, this wedge is a key determinant of firms’ investment: when
profitability is high, firms are incentivised to borrow and invest in capital.19
More precisely, this interpretation assumes that firms can borrow at the risk-free rate,
so that the wedge is the difference between funding costs and the return on capital. It
could, however, be that funding costs have not been declining in line with risk-free
rates. This would be the case if, for example, lenders are risk averse and risk or
uncertainty has increased over time.20 Funding costs would then include an increased
risk premium over the risk-free rate, to compensate investors for holding risky claims
on firms, so that the funding cost that firms face diverges from the risk-free rate over
time.
If that was the case, the wedge in Figure 4 may be capturing increased funding costs,
18

Note that we use ‘profitability’ to mean excess profitability, ie net of funding costs. Firms’ output
can be separated into labour compensation, capital payments - covering funding costs - and ‘profit’ in
excess of funding costs. In other contexts, the ‘profit rate’ refers to the gross operating surplus, which
here would be the sum of both the capital and profit shares, per unit of capital.
19
See Appendix A.2 for more discussion of the economic theory.
20
See Broadbent (2016) and Vlieghe (2017) for more discussion of risk and uncertainty, and
Melolinna et al. (2018) for a study of how these factors have impacted investment in recent years.
Note that Haskel and Westlake (2022) also argue that intangible assets are more risky, so that as
investment in intangible assets rises, the risk premium may also rise.

16

Figure 5: Nominal Investment-to-GDP
Per cent
30

30

25–75 percentile

High-income countries median

25
20

20

UK

15
0

25

1970

78

86

94

2002

15
10

0

Note: High-income countries include Finland, Italy, Netherlands, Spain and the United Kingdom.
Source: Jordà et al. (2017) Macrohistory Database, see Appendix A.1 for details.

rather than increased profitability, and we would not expect it to lead to a rise in investment.
In Appendix A.2, we compare the risk-free rate to an alternative measure of funding
costs, available for the United Kingdom for part of our sample period, and find that
they exhibit very similar dynamics.21 This suggests that the dynamics of the wedge,
therefore, do indeed reflect increased profitability.22
In light of these results, we interpret Figure 4 as evidence that firm profitability declined
between 1970 to the 1980s, and has since climbed up. However, as shown in Figure
5, investment across the same sample of high-income countries has consistently
declined or, at best, remained stagnant since the 1970s.
Bringing this together, therefore, we see that in the early part of the sample, both
investment and the wedge were declining, as we would expect from standard theory.
Since the 1990s, however, while the wedge has risen, investment has not. In other
words this highlights a “missing-investment puzzle”: not simply that investment has
21

We focus on the pre-2016 period. We can see, however, that funding costs have started to diverge
from the risk-free rate in the more recent period, possibly reflecting an increase in uncertainty following
the change in trading arrangements between the United Kingdom and the EU as emphasised in
Melolinna et al. (2018). Uncertainty around the future trading relationship and Brexit preparations may
have been weighing on business investment and productivity since 2016. This effect may disappear in
the long-run as the economy adjusts to the new trading arrangements (Bank of England, 2021).
22
In Appendix A.2 we also look at whether our measure of profitability evolves in line with Tobin’s Q.
If risk aversion was to increase, markets would price this risk and Tobin’s Q would fall. In this case, we
might see a divergence between our measure of profitability (the wedge) and Tobin’s Q. We find that
both the wedge and Tobin’s Q move together, as shown in Figure A.2, suggesting that risk premia may
struggle to explain the increasing wedge.

17

been declining, but that there are factors driving lower investment despite high profitability.23
To show this formally, we estimate the relationship between the aggregate investment
rate and the wedge in the United Kingdom.24 We measure the investment rate as the
ratio of net investment to the lagged capital stock at replacement costs for the market
sector. This is shown in the orange line in Figure 6. As with the investment-to-GDP
ratio, there is a gradual decline in this investment rate throughout the sample.
Regressing this variable on the measure of profitability shown in Figure 4, we detect
a structural break in the relationship in 2001. The dashed blue line in Figure 6 shows
the fitted value from the regression estimated from 1970 to 2001. This shows what
we would expect investment rates to be had the relationship with profitability been
unchanged after 2001.
Figure 6: Missing-Investment Puzzle in the United Kingdom
Net investment per unit of capital (per cent)
6

6

Fitted values using wedge

4

4

2

2

0
-2

0

Data
1970

78

86

94

2002

10

18

-2

Note: The orange line shows net investment per unit of capital in the data. The dashed blue line shows
the fitted value from the regression of this investment rate on the wedge between the return on capital
and the risk-free rate. See Appendix B for full details.
Source: ONS, Jordà et al. (2017) Macrohistory Database and authors’ calculations.

We can see that before the structural break, the decline in investment was in line with
the fundamentals, captured by the measure of profitability. Since the early 2000s,
however, a sizable gap opened up between observed investment and the fitted value
from the regression, thereby illustrating the missing-investment puzzle for the United
Kingdom.
23

This puzzle is therefore distinct from the long-discussed underperformance of UK investment with
respect to its international counterparts (see, eg, Gieve, 2006).
24
For more details on our regression analysis, see Appendix B.

18

3.3

Explaining the Missing-Investment Puzzle

To investigate the candidate explanations of the missing-investment puzzle, we build
on the analysis of Gutiérrez and Philippon (2017). They suggest that we can understand
the observed decline in US investment in two ways: factors that lower investment
by driving down firm profitability, such as expected growth, and factors that lower
investment despite high measured profitability. They find a significant role for factors
that fall into the latter category, precisely in line with our missing-investment puzzle.
The rest of this section focuses on these factors.
We can split the candidate explanations for the missing-investment puzzle into four
categories:
Mismeasurement of Capital: If we mismeasure the capital stock, then the empirical
measures of both investment and profitability would be mismeasured. For instance,
investment by firms has moved increasingly away from physical capital (such as
buildings and machinery) towards intangible capital (such as R&D, software, data
or branding). Measuring investment in intangible assets is far more challenging than
physical assets, and National Accounts have only recently begun to capitalise a few of
these intangible assets.25 Moreover, increasing globalisation can blur the localisation
of investment or profits for multi-national firms. Hence, these factors would mean that
we are increasingly under-measuring capital over time, which could account for the
puzzle.
Competition: The measure of the return on capital that we use, which is based on
the gross operating surplus, includes any super-normal profits earned from mark-ups
over marginal costs, arising from imperfect competition. An increase in this measure
due to an increase in mark-ups, rather than the return on productive capital, would not
be expected to lead to a boom in investment, and so could explain this puzzle.26
Corporate Governance: If firms are not willing to take up long-term investment
opportunities, they would not necessarily take up the arbitrage opportunity offered by
high profitability, or would instead borrow cheaply and pay out dividends and buy back
shares. Hence, increasing short-termism in corporate governance could also explain
the puzzle.
25

For example, R&D was capitalised only from the 2008 revision of the System of National Accounts,
which is the internationally-agreed standard for measuring economic activity.
26
Note that CHS include a mark-up in their calibration, which is included in the model-implied wedge
plotted in Figure 4, but this is held fixed over time.

19

Financial Frictions: As mentioned above, firms may not borrow at the risk-free rate.
Imperfect information or moral hazard between lenders and borrowers (eg, between
firms and banks or banks and depositors) leads to the emergence of an externalfinance premium, ie a wedge between the risk-free rate and the cost of borrowing
of firms. While we showed that the increase in profitability was robust to using other
direct measures of funding costs, we can also investigate the impact of factors that
determine the external-finance premium, such as the degree of reliance on external
financing, or the liquidity or leverage of firms.
Which of these factors is most important is an empirical question, and Gutiérrez and
Philippon (2017) investigate this question using industry-level data for the United
States. Many candidate explanations, such as the intangible share of capital and
financial frictions, vary greatly across industries, so a solely macro perspective may
be somewhat incomplete.
While some of these factors can be global in nature, there are also important differences
across countries. For example, Gutiérrez and Philippon (2017) find an important
role for decreased competition in explaining the puzzle in the United States. While
there is a consensus on the increase in market power in the United States (Autor
et al., 2017; De Loecker et al., 2020), the United Kingdom does not seem to have
experienced such marked trends (Aguda et al., 2022). This suggests that the drivers
of the missing-investment puzzle could be different.27 We therefore employ UK industrylevel data to investigate which of the candidate explanations for the missing-investment
puzzle is more relevant in the United Kingdom.
We first check to confirm whether the puzzle is present in the industry-level data.
Figure 7 shows the results from a regression of the investment rate on the measure of
profitability. In particular, it illustrates the unexplained variation in investment, for both
the aggregate data (blue line), and the industry-level data (orange line).
The industry-level data also shows that investment has been low relative to measures
of profitability since the early 2000s, indicating a missing-investment puzzle very
similar to the one in the aggregate data.
We then investigate which of the list of candidate explanations can account for this
unexplained weakness in investment. To do this, we augment our industry-level
regression by including proxies for those candidate factors, and assess whether the
27

Indeed, there is a renewed debate focusing on the secular dynamics behind the United Kingdom’s
economic underperformance in terms of investment and productivity against its international peers
(see, among others, The Economist, 2022).

20

Figure 7: The Puzzle at the Industry Level
Percentage points
4

4

Aggregate data

0
-4
-8

0
-4

Industry-level data
1970

78

86

94

2002

10

18

-8

Note: The blue line shows the residuals from the regression described in Figure 6. The orange line
shows the year fixed effects from an industry-level regression of investment rates on the wedge,
including industry fixed effects, and standard errors clustered at the industry level. See Appendix B for
full details.
Source: ONS, KLEMS, Jordà et al. (2017) Macrohistory Database and authors’ calculations.

unexplained variation in investment is affected.28
Here, we will focus on the key result from this analysis: intangible capital goes a long
way to explain the missing-investment puzzle in the United Kingdom.
To show this, we use the 2022 vintage of the EU KLEMS data. This vintage not
only includes the latest improvements in measuring intangible assets from National
Accounts, but also capitalises a broader set of intangible assets building on the work
by INTAN-Invest.29 It is the first vintage of EU KLEMS that includes 7 intangible
assets in addition to the 4 that were already included in National Accounts, and as
such constitutes the first harmonised and fully integrated industry accounts with such
a broad measure of intangibles to date.30
We repeat the industry-level regressions, replacing both the measure of investment
rates on the left-hand side, and the measure of the return on capital used for the
wedge on right-hand side, with these data that are adjusted for intangibles. Figure 8
shows the unexplained variation from the baseline industry-level regressions, as in
Figure 7, as well as the new regression adjusted for intangibles. While the missinginvestment puzzle can still be seen, it is significantly smaller before 2008, becomes
smaller again from around 2013, and is even insignificant towards the end of the
28

Appendix B provides a detailed discussion of how we investigate each of the different explanations.
INTAN-Invest is a research collaboration dedicated to improving the measurement of intangible
assets building on the work by Corrado et al. (2016), and now feeds into the latest EU KLEMS vintage.
30
See Appendix A.2 for more details on the assets included.
29

21

sample. In other words, the puzzle is smaller and almost disappears in recent years,
suggesting that the measurement of intangibles can account for an important part of
the puzzle.
Figure 8: Explaining the Puzzle with Intangibles
Percentage points
6

6

Adjusted for intangibles

0

0

-6
-12

-6

Unadjusted for intangibles
1998

2002

06

10

14

18

-12

Note: The orange line shows the industry-level puzzle as in Figure 7, and the shaded area around it
is the 95% confidence intervals. The blue line shows the same statistic from the regressions in which
both investment rates and the wedge are adjusted to include intangibles. See Appendix A.2 for a
discussion of the adjustment.
Source: ONS, KLEMS, Jordà et al. (2017) Macrohistory Database and authors’ calculations.

The remaining puzzle is mostly concentrated immediately after the global financial
crisis. As such, it is unlikely that it reflects structural changes, but rather the effects
of the crisis (eg, on financial frictions, see Gopinath et al., 2017). It is worth noting
that this result continues to hold even when we include measures of the financialfrictions explanations of the missing-investment puzzle (in particular, external-finance
dependence and liquidity). It could be that we need to further explore firm-level data
to capture the impact of financial frictions more accurately, or that there are large
non-linearities related to the nature of the crisis that the regression framework does
not capture. However, this suggests that the remaining puzzle is likely to be more
conjunctural than structural.31

3.4

Intangibles and Productivity

We have shown that, once we account for intangibles, the UK missing-investment
puzzle occurs mostly following the global financial crisis, and seems to have disappeared
in recent years. What does this mean for productivity and output?
Parallel to this remaining missing-investment puzzle, there was a substantial (missing)
31

Döttling et al. (2017) similarly found that, contrary to the United States, the missing-investment
puzzle in Europe is more conjunctural than structural.

22

productivity puzzle throughout advanced economies.32 In the United Kingdom, labour
productivity growth declined by as much as 1.3 percentage points in the latest ONS
data, when comparing pre- and post-crisis averages (2008-2018 vs. 2000-2007).
Does the rise in intangible capital play any role in explaining the productivity puzzle?
Surprisingly, rather than reducing this puzzle, as it did for investment, intangibles
appear to be driving the productivity puzzle. Figure 9 shows that intangible-intensive
industries experience the strongest slowdowns in labour productivity growth since the
crisis.33
Figure 9: Intangibles May be Driving the Productivity Puzzle
Slowdown in labour productivity growth, over 2008–18
versus 2000–07 (percentage points)
4

US

0
-4

4

UK

0
-4

EU4 (DE, ES, FR, IT)

-8
-12

-8

0

10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Intangible share of total capital stock, 2000–07 average (per cent)

80

-12

Note: The y-axis shows the change in average labour productivity growth over 2008-2017 relative to
the average over the 2000-2007 period. The x-axis displays the average share of intangible assets
in total capital. Each ‘bubble’ represents an industry, with the size of the bubbles reflecting its share
in total employment within each country, thereby measuring the industry’s contribution to aggregate
labour productivity growth. EU4 consists of Germany, Spain, France and Italy.
Source: ONS, KLEMS and authors’ calculations, see Appendix A.1 for more details.

One potential reason for this finding is that investment in intangibles is harder to
finance. A growing literature shows that there are unique barriers to intangible investment,
such as the fact that these assets are harder to use as collateral.34 For this reason,
it could be that intangible-intensive industries were most affected by the tightening
financial conditions after the global financial crisis, which then had long-term scarring
32

While past data have shown that this slowdown was strongest in the United Kingdom –at around
1.7 percentage points, recent revisions from the ONS in the 2021 Bluebook now suggests that the
UK puzzle is of similar extent to the one in other advanced economies. The slowdown is now around
1.3 percentage points in the latest ONS data, smaller than the US data in KLEMS exhibiting a 1.5
percentage point slowdown.
33
This point is also raised in Goodridge and Haskel (2022).
34
See Haskel and Westlake (2022) for a literature review.

23

effects on productivity growth (De Ridder, 2016; Haskel and Westlake, 2022). However,
while intangible investment has recovered in recent years, productivity is still low.
Could it be that the additional barriers to financing intangibles benefit investment by
less productive firms?
Another explanation could be related to the impact of the intangible economy on
competition. Intangible technologies tend to require large upfront investments, or
so-called fixed costs. This gives firms with high-intangible adoption a competitive
advantage, and stops new innovative firms from entering the market. Existing firms
become entrenched and have less incentive to innovate, slowing innovation adoption
in the long-run (De Ridder, 2019; Aghion et al., 2019). It is difficult, however, to find
supporting evidence in UK data. While this mechanism is consistent with the decline
in business dynamism and the increase in market power documented in the United
States, business dynamism has not been declining as much in the United Kingdom in
recent decades.35 Could it be that these risks have not yet materialised in the United
Kingdom?

4

Conclusions

In this paper, we have shown that the substantial global structural changes experienced
in recent decades have a profound impact on the long-run policy landscape.
Within our modelling framework, both the secular decline in productivity growth and
increased longevity imply permanently lower Global R∗ . This means that, without
significant reversal in these structural trends, or the emergence of new long-run
structural forces pushing in a different direction, Global R∗ is expected to remain low.
We have also shown that, in the UK data, the missing-investment puzzle (the apparent
weakness in investment despite an increasing wedge between the return on capital
and the risk-free interest rate) over the same period, can be largely accounted for
by the mismeasurement of intangible capital. Once we control for intangibles, the
headwinds that have weakened investment seem to have originated from the persistent
effects of the global financial crisis, and appear to have dissipated by 2016.
However, in these same years the United Kingdom has seen a substantial productivity
35

See, for example, Figure A.5 in Appendix A.2, showing that firm entry and exit rates were stable
in the United Kingdom since the early 2000s, as opposed to declining in the United States (Akcigit
and Ates, 2021). Gutiérrez and Piton (2020) also show that labour shares have not been falling in the
United Kingdom as opposed to the United States. See Appendix A.2 for a more detailed discussion of
business dynamism in the United Kingdom.

24

puzzle. Rather than reducing this puzzle as it did for investment, intangibles may be
driving the labour productivity puzzle, making the overall long-run impact on output
ambiguous. Future research should shed light on the unique challenges from the
increase in intangible capital, and how these can be addressed.

References
Aghion, P., Bergeaud, A., Boppart, T., Klenow, P. J., and Li, H. (2019). A Theory of
Falling Growth and Rising Rents. Working Paper Series 2019-11, Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco.
Aguda, O., Galanakis, Y., Hwang, K. I., and Savagar, A. (2022). Product Market
Concentration and Productivity in the UK. Working paper.
Akcigit, U. and Ates, S. T. (2021). Ten facts on declining business dynamism
and lessons from endogenous growth theory. American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics, 13(1):257–98.
Alfaro, L., Beck, T., and Calomiris, C. W. (2015).
Entrepreneurship. Working paper.

Foreign Bank Entry and

Aquilante, T., Chowla, S., Dacic, N., Haldane, A., Masolo, R., Schneider, P., Seneca,
M., and Tatomir, S. (2019). Market power and monetary policy. Bank of England
Staff Working Papers 798, Bank of England.
Auclert, A., Malmberg, H., Martenet, F., and Rognlie, M. (2021). Demographics, Wealth,
and Global Imbalances in the Twenty-First Century. NBER Working Papers 29161,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Auclert, A. and Rognlie, M. (2018). Inequality and aggregate demand. Working Paper
24280, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Autor, D., Dorn, D., Katz, L. F., Patterson, C., and Van Reenen, J. (2017).
Concentrating on the fall of the labor share. American Economic Review, 107(5):180–
85.
Bahaj, S., Foulis, A., and Pinter, G. (2020). Home values and firm behavior. American
Economic Review, 110(7):2225–70.
Bank of England (2018). The equilibrium interest rate. Inflation Report, August 2018.
Bank of England (2021). Monetary Policy Report. November 2021.
25

Blanchard, O. (2022). Fiscal Policy Under Low Interest Rates. MIT Press, 0 edition.
https://fiscal-policy-under-low-interest-rates.pubpub.org.
Broadbent, B. (2016). Uncertain times. Speech by Ben Broadbent at the Wall Street
Journal, The News Building, London.
Caballero, R. J., Farhi, E., and Gourinchas, P.-O. (2017). Rents, technical change,
and risk premia accounting for secular trends in interest rates, returns on capital,
earning yields, and factor shares. American Economic Review, 107(5):614–20.
Cesa-Bianchi, A., Harrison, R., and Sajedi, R. (2022). Decomposing the Drivers of
Global R∗ . Bank of England Staff Working Papers 990, Bank of England.
Corrado, C., Haskel, J., Jona-Lasinio, C., and Iommi, M. (2016). Intangible investment
in the EU and US before and since the Great Recession and its contribution to
productivity growth. EIB Working Papers 2016/08, European Investment Bank (EIB).
De Loecker, J., Eeckhout, J., and Unger, G. (2020). The Rise of Market Power and the
Macroeconomic Implications*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135(2):561–644.
De Ridder, M. (2016). Investment in Productivity and the Long-Run Effect of Financial
Crises on Output. Cambridge Working Papers in Economics 1659, Faculty of
Economics, University of Cambridge.
De Ridder, M. (2019). Market Power and Innovation in the Intangible Economy.
Cambridge Working Papers in Economics 1931, Faculty of Economics, University
of Cambridge.
Del Negro, M., Giannone, D., Giannoni, M. P., and Tambalotti, A. (2019). Global trends
in interest rates. Journal of International Economics, 118(C):248–262.
Döttling, R., Gutiérrez, G., and Philippon, T. (2017). Is there an investment gap
in advanced economies? if so, why? in Investment and Growth in Advanced
Economies, ECB: Frankfurt am Main.
Feenstra, R. C., Inklaar, R., and Timmer, M. P. (2015). The next generation of the penn
world table. American Economic Review, 105(10):3150–82.
Fiorentini, G., Galesi, A., Perez-Quiros, G., and Sentana, E. (2018). The Rise and Fall
of the Natural Interest Rate. CEPR Discussion Papers 13042, C.E.P.R. Discussion
Papers.

26

Gieve, J. (2006). The Puzzle of UK Business Investment. Speech by John Gieve at the
University of the West of England, Bristol.
Goodhart, C. and Pradhan, M. (2020). The Great Demographic Reversal. Economic
Affairs, 40(3):436–445.
Goodridge, P. and Haskel, J. (2022). Accounting for the slowdown in UK innovation and
productivity. Forthcoming working paper.
Gopinath, G., Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Karabarbounis, L., and Villegas-Sanchez, C. (2017).
Capital allocation and productivity in south europe. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
132(4):1915–1967.
Gutiérrez, G., Martinez, J., Philippon, T., and Piton, S. (2022). The Evolution of Firm
Heterogeneity in Europe: Facts and Explanations. Forthcoming working paper.
Gutiérrez, G. and Philippon, T. (2017). Investmentless Growth: An Empirical
Investigation. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 48(2 (Fall)):89–190.
Gutiérrez, G. and Piton, S. (2020). Revisiting the Global Decline of the (Non-housing)
Labor Share. American Economic Review: Insights, 2(3):321–338.
Hall, R. and Jorgenson, D. (1967). Tax policy and investment behavior. American
Economic Review, 57(3):391–414.
Hamilton, J. D., Harris, E. S., Hatzius, J., and West, K. D. (2016). The Equilibrium Real
Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future. IMF Economic Review, 64(4):660–707.
Haskel, J. and Westlake, S. (2022). Restarting the Future. How to Fix the Intangible
Economy.
Holston, K., Laubach, T., and Williams, J. C. (2017). Measuring the natural rate of
interest: International trends and determinants. Journal of International Economics,
108(S1):59–75.
Jordà, O., Schularick, M., and Taylor, A. M. (2017). Macrofinancial History and the New
Business Cycle Facts. NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 31(1):213–263.
Jorgenson, D. (1963). Capital theory and investment behavior. American Economic
Review, 53(2):247–259.
Koltay, G., Lorncz, S., and Valletti, T. M. (2022). Concentration and Competition:
Evidence from Europe and Implications for Policy. CESifo Working Paper Series
9640, CESifo.
27

Lisack, N., Sajedi, R., and Thwaites, G. (2021). Population aging and the
macroeconomy. International Journal of Central Banking, 17(2):43–80.
Loecker, J. D., Obermeier, T., and Reenen, J. V. (2022). Firms and Inequality. CEP
Discussion Papers dp1838, Centre for Economic Performance, LSE.
Melolinna, M., Miller, H., and Tatomir, S. (2018). Business investment, cost of capital
and uncertainty in the United Kingdom - evidence from firm-level analysis. Bank of
England Staff Working Papers 717, Bank of England.
Mian, A., Straub, L., and Sufi, A. (2021). What explains the decline in r*? rising
income inequality versus demographic shifts. Proceedings of the 2021 Jackson
Hole Symposium.
Moll, B., Rachel, L., and Restrepo, P. (2021). Uneven growth: automation’s impact
on income and wealth inequality. Bank of England working papers 913, Bank of
England.
Moreno Badia, M. M., Mbaye, S., and Chae, K. (2018). Global Debt Database:
Methodology and Sources. IMF Working Papers 2018/111, International Monetary
Fund.
Piton, S. and Vatan, A. (2018). Firm Ownership and the Labour Share. Working paper.
Rajan, R. G. and Zingales, L. (1998). Financial dependence and growth. The American
Economic Review, 88(3):559–586.
Reis, R. (2021). The constraint on public debt when r<g but g<m. CEPR Discussion
Papers 15950, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.
Sajedi, R. and Thwaites, G. (2016). Why Are Real Interest Rates So Low? The Role
of the Relative Price of Investment Goods. IMF Economic Review, 64(4):635–659.
The Economist (2022). Britain’s productivity problem is long-standing and getting
worse. June 11th 2022 Edition.
Tobin, J. (1969). A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory. Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, 1(1):15–29.
Vlieghe, G. (2017). Real interest rates and risk. Speech by Gertjan Vlieghe at the
Society of Business Economists’ Annual conference, London.
Vlieghe, G. (2021). Running out of room: revisiting the 3d perspective on low interest
rates. Speech by Gertjan Vlieghe at the London School of Economics, London.
28

Ziesemer, T. (2021). Labour-augmenting technical change data for alternative
elasticities of substitution: growth, slowdown, and distribution dynamics. Economics
of Innovation and New Technology, 0(0):1–27.

Appendix
A

Data Definitions

A.1

Data sources

For the structural and empirical models of Global R∗ , Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2022)
consider the following list of high income countries used in the analysis: Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Canada, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Hong Kong, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, Lithuania,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Singapore, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States.
The data for the five drivers of Global R∗ is from a combination of Penn World Table
10.0 (relative price of capital), United Nations Department of Economic and Social
Affairs (population growth and longevity), Ziesemer (2021) (labour-augmenting productivity)
Moreno Badia et al. (2018) (debt to GDP). The data for the calibration of the model
is from Caballero et al. (2017) (Real return on capital), US Census (Cohort-specific
labour supply), and Penn World Table 10.0 (Capital to output ratio). The data for the
empirical model is a combination of Jordà-Schularick-Taylor Macrohistory Database
(Jordà et al., 2017) and Eikon Refinitiv for short- and long-term interest rates and CPI
inflation.
For the missing-investment puzzle analysis, we use the following main data sources:
• EU KLEMS: our primary dataset is the 2021 vintage of EU KLEMS, which
includes industry accounts for all European countries as well as the United
States. We apply Gutiérrez and Piton (2020) methodology and use previous
vintages to extend our data as far back as possible (1970 for most countries).
This 2021 vintage of EU KLEMS includes detailed information on intangibles
from 1995, including assets that are not capitalised in National Accounts building
on the work by INTAN-Invest.
• ONS: the UK data in 2021 EU KLEMS vintage does not include ONS latest
revisions and, specifically, double deflation introduced in the 2021 Bluebook.
29

For this reason, and like Goodridge and Haskel (2022), we use instead ONS
GVA and GVA deflator data by industry division for the United Kingdom.
• Historical data: we complement historical information at the country-level using
the Penn World Table 10.0 (Feenstra et al., 2015) for investment-to-GDP ratios,
the Jordà-Schularick-Taylor Macrohistory Database (Jordà et al., 2017) for the
risk-free rate and CPI inflation. The UK weighted average cost of capital uses
data from the Bank of England Millenium of Macroeconomic Data, Bloomberg
Finance LP, Tradeweb, Refinitiv Eikon and I/B/E/S both from LSEG and the IMF
WEO.
• Firm-level data: we complement data from National Accounts with industry-level
indicators built using firm-level data for the United Kingdom. We take most of
this data from a large micro dataset of firms’ financial accounts, including annual
balance sheet, income and cash flow statements, provided by Bureau van Dijk
(BvD). This commercial database builds on the publicly available filings of each
firm at Companies House, the registrar of companies in the United Kingdom.
The database covers much of the corporate universe of the United Kingdom.
We use concentration ratios at the industry-level from Aguda et al. (2022), built
using the UK Census of firms (ONS BSD dataset). Finally, we use Worldscope
covering all listed firms in the United Kingdom for measures of Tobin’s Q.

A.2

Variable definitions

Investment and capital stock We first focus on investment-to-GDP ratios for
the total economy (Figure 5). We then focus on the investment rates from Figure 6
onwards, defined as investment net of depreciation to the lagged capital stock at
current replacement costs. The main series include only assets capitalised in National
Accounts, while the intangible adjusted series include additional assets available in
KLEMS.36
Profitability As already described in the main text, our preferred measure of profitability
is the wedge between the return on capital and the risk-free rate. Note that profitability
here is thus net of capital cost.
The return on capital is the real internal rate of return (IRR) from the standard Hall
36

See KLEMS documentation available here.

30

and Jorgenson (1967) formula measured at the industry level. More specifically, it is:

IRRt =

GOSt − qK,t−1 Kt [δK (1 + q̂K,t ) − q̂K,t ]
1+
qK,t−1 Kt



1
−1
1 + πt

with GOS the gross operating surplus, δK the depreciation rate for asset k, K the
capital stock, q its price and q̂ the 3-year moving average of its price growth (expected
price inflation of capital), π the CPI inflation.
Note that the standard Hall and Jorgenson (1967) formula also includes tax adjustment
factor. We abstract from this due to data limitations for a large sample of countries.
Using UK data, we find that this tax adjustment only changes marginally the measure
of the wedge.
We use the risk-free rate in the baseline analysis assuming it is representative of
firms’ funding costs. For robustness, we use an alternative measure of funding costs
using a weighted average cost of debt and equity from the Bank of England (see
Figure A.1). We find that this funding cost comoves strongly with the safe rate, though
we can see a recent increase in the WACC in the most recent period, suggesting that
the safe rate is a good proxy for funding costs over the period of analysis.
In the workhorse model for firm investment, Q-theory (Jorgenson, 1963; Tobin, 1969),
the sufficient statistic for profitability is Tobin’s Q, defined as the ratio of market value
to replacement cost of capital stock. We confront our measure of profitability, based
on the wedge between the internal rate of return and the funding costs of the firms,
to Tobin’s Q from Worldscope listed firms data. As seen in Figure A.2, Tobin’s Q also
increases from the early 2000s.
Figure 3 focuses on the sample of countries with data available since the early 1970s.
Figure A.3 shows that using a larger sample of countries from 1987 does not change
the main result: the return on capital has been flat when the risk-free rate declined
steadily.
Intangibles Central to this paper is the role played by intangible investment. National
accounts include some intangible assets (Software and databases, R&D, other intellectual
property products).37 However, these measures miss firms’ increased spending
on some intangible assets such as organisation capital, design, market research,
advertising or staff training. While financial markets might value these types of expenses
37

See ESA2010 Annex 7.1 for a definition of those assets.

31

Figure A.1: Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) vs. Risk-Free Rate
Per cent
20

20

16

16

WACC
12

12

8

8

4
0

4

Long-term nominal interest rates
1987

92

97

2002

07

12

0

17

Note: The blue line shows the weighted average cost of debt, bond and equity for private non-financial
corporations. The orange line shows ten-year government bond yields. Both series are for the United
Kingdom.
Source: Jordà et al. (2017) for the risk-free rate; the Bank of England Millenium of Macroeconomic
Data, Bloomberg Finance LP, Tradeweb, Refinitiv Eikon and I/B/E/S both from LSEG, the IMF WEO
and Bank calculations for the WACC.

Figure A.2: Tobin’s Q in the UK
Tobin’s Q
3

Per cent
9

ONS (left axis)

Worldscope (left axis)
2

6

1

3

Wedge (right axis)
0

1987

91

95

99

2003

07

11

15

0

Note: The blue line shows the UK wedge as in Figure 4. The purple line shows Tobin’s Q using ONS
data, defined as the market value of total equity liabilities over the capital stock (of fixed assets) at
replacement costs, for non-financial corporations. The orange line shows Tobin’s Q from Worldscope,
defined as the ratio of market value of equity, total liabilities, and preferred stock, over total assets.
Source: ONS, Eikon from Refinitiv and authors’ calculations.

as investment, they are not capitalised and thus not included in measures of investment.
We use the latest EU KLEMS vintage which capitalises 7 of these additional assets
32

Figure A.3: Return on Capital vs. Risk-Free Rates: Larger Sample of Countries
(a) Return on capital has been relatively stable
Per cent
24

24

25–75 percentile

18

18
12

12
6
0

6

High-income countries median
1987

95

2003

0

11

(b) Risk-free returns have fallen since the 1980s
Per cent
9

9

25–75 percentile

6

6

High-income countries median

3

3

0

0

-3

1985

90

95

2000

05

10

15

-3

Note: High-income countries still include Finland, Italy, Netherlands, Spain and the United Kingdom;
but also France, Japan and the United States. See Appendix A.2 for data definitions.
Source: Authors’ calculations using EU KLEMS, the Penn World Table 10.0 and the Jordà et al. (2017)
Macrohistory Database.

accounting for about 60% of total intangible investment and almost 40% of total
capital.38 We compute adjusted measures of investment and profitability using this
broader investment data. Interestingly, as we can see in Figure A.4, and differently
from the corresponding unadjusted Figure 5 in the main text, once we use these
adjusted measures, UK investment-to-GDP ratio seems to be in line with its international
38

The 7 new assets are Industrial Design, New product development costs in the financial industry,
Innovative Property, Brand, Organisational Capital, Training and Economic Competencies.

33

counterparts. As intangible investments has become an ever larger share of total
investment, this compositional effect is able to account for some of the missing investment
puzzle in the UK. In other words, investment is higher and more in line with profitability
once we take into account intangibles, as described in the main text.
Figure A.4: Investment-to-GDP Including Additional Intangibles
Per cent
60
50

25–75 percentile

50
40

40
30
0

60

High-income countries median

UK
30
1995

2000

05

10

15

0

Note: High-income countries include Finland, Italy, Netherlands, Spain and the United Kingdom. The
chart shows nominal investment-to-GDP including the additional intangible assets in the latest EU
KLEMS vintage for the measure of investment. Note that those assets are not included in the measure
of GDP.
Source: Authors’ calculations using EU KLEMS and the Penn World Tables.

Beyond affecting the (mis)measurement of investment, Moll et al. (2021) show how
the capital demand shock associated with the increasing demand for intangible assets
in a model with an upward slopping capital supply schedule can affect capital returns
more than investment quantities, and lead to a muted increase in investment relative
to profitability. Note that the authors focus on automation rather than intangible investment.
However, evidence on automation adoption (imports of robots) points to low investment
in automation in the UK relative other European countries, suggesting that intangible
capital might play a more important role for the UK.39
Globalisation Next, we look into measures of globalisation, or the foreign activity of
UK firms. In a similar way that firms’ spending on intangibles constitutes a challenge
for the measure of investment, UK firms could be increasingly investing abroad rather
than in the UK and this pattern could translate into a low investment rate in UK data.
39

A look at Comext data suggests that UK imports of robots as a share of GDP is below its large EU
counterparts. For example, they are flat at 0.2% of GDP since the early 2000, while increasing 0.8 to
1.2% in Germany from 2000 to 2015. This could partly reflect the fact that robots are mostly used in
manufacturing, which is a small share of GDP in the UK.

34

Unfortunately, we do not have data on UK firms’ investment abroad. However, for
our regression analysis, we are able to observe the share of foreign sales out of total
turnover for UK businesses in the FAME-BvD dataset.40
Competition Decreased competition, due to technology or regulation, has been
put forward as one of the most important drivers of the US investment puzzle (see,
among others, Gutiérrez and Philippon, 2017). This decline in competition is reflected
in a decline in business dynamism more generally in the United States (Akcigit and
Ates, 2021), with increased concentration, declines in firm entry and exit rates, and a
large reallocation of market shares towards low labour share/high capital-intensive or
profitable firms leading to a secular decline in the labour share of income.
In contrast, evidence on business dynamism is mixed in the UK. While there is strong
evidence for an increase in mark-ups (Aquilante et al., 2019; Loecker et al., 2022), the
literature is yet to achieve consensus when it comes to concentration in firms’ sales:
for example, Aguda et al. (2022) show flat concentration, while Koltay et al. (2022)
find rising concentration. Furthermore, the UK labour share is flat since the early
2000s (Gutiérrez and Piton, 2020) and does not seem to reflect the same reallocation
of market shares to low labour share firms as in the United States (Gutiérrez et al.,
2022). Finally, firm entry and exit have not been falling, as shown in Figure A.5. At
face value, all this evidence may suggest a more muted contribution of competition to
the investment puzzle for the UK than for the United States.
Financial frictions Forms of financial frictions, such as the lack of sufficient internal
funds and difficulties in getting external funding, could prevent firms from pursuing
investment projects even when these may be profitable. In this paper we use our
firm-level dataset to construct measures of external finance dependence following
Rajan and Zingales (1998), looking at how much of a firm’s investment in BvD is
accounted for by external funding. As in Gutiérrez and Philippon (2017), we also
split this indicator into its part accounted by debt and the one by equity. In addition
to that, in our analysis we look also at other measures of financial constraintness
such as ratios of cash and net current assets to total assets, as well as leverage. We
aggregate these indicators to industry-level by considering the median across firms
40

In other unreported results, we do find some increase in the share of UK listed firms’ sales being
outside the UK and similarly UK listed firms own an increasing amount of assets abroad in Worldscope
data. This could suggest a role for globalisation in the investment puzzle. However, we prefer to use
the larger sample from FAME-BvD, as it includes also the vast group of non-listed firms.

35

Figure A.5: Entry and Exit Rates
Per cent
20

20

Incorporation rate

15

15

10

10

Dissolution rate

5
0

1980

88

96

2004

5

12

20

0

Note: Blue line shows UK firm entry as measured by the number of incorporations to the total number
of live firms on Companies House register. Orange line shows UK firm exit as measured by the
dissolution rate also from Companies House register.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Companies House.

within each industry.41
Corporate governance Another explanation for the investment puzzle highlighted
in the literature covering the United States is the evolution of corporate governance.
The hypothesis is that an increasing share of passive actors in the running of businesses
may have led to less shareholders’ activism and increasing short-termism. Both these
forces may then explain the subdued investment despite the observed stable degree
of profitability. In contrast with the United States, we do not see a clear increase in
payouts or institutional ownership in National Accounts in the UK (Piton and Vatan,
2018).

B

Regression Analysis

Aggregate regression In the main text we report results from an aggregate regression
of UK net investment per unit of capital (NIpk) on the aggregate wedge (all the variables
41

Gutiérrez and Philippon (2017) look also into the possible role played by firm-level bank
dependence and safe asset scarcity. The former is particularly relevant for businesses without access
to capital markets, where financial frictions through banks may mean that bank-dependent firms are
responsible for the observed underinvestment (Alfaro et al., 2015). The latter would affect firms’ capital
costs, but would lead to a disconnect between investment and the wedge only if safe businesses,
which should have lower capital costs, cannot or do not wish to exploit those, eg because of product
market rents. Unfortunately, we were not able to investigate these avenues in our analysis due to data
limitations.

36

used in the regression analysis are described in Table B.1).

N Ipkt = β ∗ wedget + ut
We detect a structural break in 2001 and thus estimate the model up to that date. As
expected the coefficient β on the wedge is positive and significant; given that, we
show residuals from this econometric model for the whole sample to document and
quantify the UK investment puzzle given profitability, as described in the main text.
Notice these results are supported by our industry-level regressions below, where we
do not split the sample for structural breaks.
Industry-level regressions We complement our aggregate results looking at
industry-level information. We run regressions of net investment per unit of capital on
a constructed industry-level wedge, and include both industry and year fixed effects,
as well as clustering by industry and year. Notice that, at industry-level, we document
and quantify the puzzle following Gutiérrez and Philippon (2017) by reporting the
(negative) year fixed effects from this regression.

N Ipkit = γ ∗ wedgeit + δi + δt + uit
where δi and δt represent the industry and year fixed effects, respectively.
To show the importance of intangibles in explaining the puzzle, we run a regression
of the investment rate on the wedge, both adjusted for the additional intangibles
not included in National Accounts (N Ipk adj and wedgeadj , respectively) –again the
regression includes also industry fixed effects and clustering at the industry-year level.
We interpret the reduction in the estimated drag from the year fixed effects shown in
Figure 8 in the main text as evidence of intangibles helping explaining the investment
puzzle.

Finally, we use the regression of N Ipk adj on wedgeadj as our baseline, and include
each selected additional explanation one by one to test whether it may help explaining
the remaining puzzle.

N Ipkitadj = γ adj ∗ wedgeadj
it + θ ∗ explanationit + δi + δt + uit
37

When we include all the selected measures from Table B.1, our sample shrinks considerably:
it ends up including only observations from 2000 onwards. For robustness we thus
proceed in two fashions.
First, we constrain each regression to match the estimated coefficients for the wedge
and industry-level fixed effects from the baseline model using data from the longer
sample. Crucially, we allow the year fixed effects to change to understand how the
puzzle is affected. This procedure does not seem to suggest that any of our preferred
measures contributes substantially to explain the puzzle once intangibles are taken
into account.42
Second, we restrict the sample to the years common to all variables considered
for our explanations, and let the model re-estimate everything each time. Again,
this does not change our main result on the important role played by intangibles as
opposed to other explanations.

42

We were able to find, if anything, some evidence of our measure of leverage helping with
explaining some of the puzzle. While we follow the literature here focusing on the measures of external
finance dependence described in Table B.1, we believe this result is in line with the main conclusion
that the investment puzzle in the UK may have been more conjonctural than structural, unlike in the
United States. Thus, we find this promising in terms of further future investigations in the link between
the puzzle and financial frictions, perhaps pursuing more sophisticated approaches than our simple
method here –eg including non-linearities, more indicators or other moments of the within industry
distributions.

38

Table B.1: Summary of Variables for Regression Analysis
Variables

Definitions

Core covariates
N Ipk

Investment net of depreciation divided by the lagged
capital stock

W edge

Spread between return on capital and the safe rate

N ipk adj

Same as NIpk, but adjusted for the additional
intangibles missing from National Accounts

W edgeadj

Same as wedge, but adjusted for the additional
intangibles missing from National Accounts

Additional explanations
Globalisation

Share of sales abroad out of total sales - median
across firms within an industry.

Financial frictions

i) External finance constraints: median across firms
within an industry of external finance dependence, ie
how much investment is founded by external sources
including equity and debt (Rajan and Zingales, 1998).
ii) Liquidity: median across firms within an industry of
the ratios over total assets of net current assets and
cash (the latter as bank deposit minus bank overdraft,
see Bahaj et al., 2020).
iii) Leverage: median across firms within an industry
of the ratio of debt over total assets.

Competition

i) Concentration ratios, as the percentage of industrylevel sales accounted for by the top 5, 10, 20 and 50
firms.
ii)
index defined as HHIk =
PHerfindahl-Hirschman
2
s
where
s
denotes
the
share of sales for firm j in
j
j j
a given industry k.

39

