Gauging (dis)inflationary
pressures: comparing tools
and current findings
SUERF
February 2023
Emma Hatwell and Huw Pill
Monetary Analysis

Unobserved components (UC) models determine our bottom-up
approach to short-term inflation forecasts
CPI inflation rose to 11% in 2022 Q4, but is expected to fall back to 8% by 2023 Q21

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, ONS and Bank calculations.
1Figures

in parentheses are CPI basket weights in 2022. Data to December 2022. Bank staff projections from January to June 2023. Fuels and lubricants estimates use Department for
Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy petrol price data for January 2023 and then are based on the sterling oil futures curve. Other goods is the difference between CPI inflation and the
other contributions identified in the chart.

2

Utilise staff research to improve the accuracy of the models
1/3 to 2/3 of STIF components by weight were improved at the
1 to 6 month horizon2,3
•

UC model with stochastic volatility and automatic outlier
adjustment
o Stochastic volatility is useful as certain components
experience periods of higher volatility
o The outlier detection feature handles the one-off
changes in volatility
o The outlier detection feature is comparable to most
recent developments in the literature during the
Covid period that accounts for the fat-tails/ tdistribution

Red dots show weaker performance from using the new UCSV models
Blue dots show improvement from using the new UCSV models

Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
2

Component Level Short-Term Inflation Forecasting for the UK (Esady and Mate, mimeo)
We exclude non-comparable components for our forecast comparison. These include petrol, utilities, education, financial services, other household goods and other household services. Actual
STIF includes staff judgement which may have improved forecasting performance, so comparison not purely like-for-like
3

3

We use an indicator model as a top-down cross-check
…which allow us to cross-check against our main
forecast

Increasing correlation
with CPIX

We draw on a number of different indicators…

BCC

Agents
PMI
PPI
PPI
PMI
Agents

PMI
Agents

MakeUK

MakeUK
BCC

Agents

SPPI

Agents
PPI

Agents

Agents

PPI
PMI

BCC
BCC

Agents
CBI

CBI

CBI
BRC

PriceStats

Imports
Notes:
• CPIX excludes energy, housing,
education and financial services
• Text in squares indicates source of
indicators; more than one indicator
can be drawn from any single data
source

>85th percentil e
Up to 85th percentil e
Wi thi n 35th-65th percentil es
Up to 35th percentil e
<15th percentil e

Sources: ONS, S&P Global/CIPS and Bank calculations.
4

Food price inflation has reached a 45-year high reflecting higher
agricultural prices and producer input costs
Commodity prices and food PPIs remain elevated but are expected to slow

Sources: S&P GSCI agriculture and livestock index spot
and Bank Calculations.

Sources: ONS.
5

Energy prices have soared; we aim to capture both direct and
indirect effects on CPI
Contributions from energy are expected to fall but
remain high

As we also estimate the indirect effects of energy

Use Market curve for gas and
oil to estimate coke and
refined petroleum, electricity
and gas price changes

No direct
effect given
price cap

Use I-O analysis to
estimate indirect effects

CPA to COICOP
converter
CPI Weights

Convert into CPI
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., Department for Business, Energy
and Industrial Strategy, ONS and Bank calculations.

We track measures of underlying inflation and higher frequency
movements to assess the risk of inflation persistence
Underlying inflation model (UIM) captures
common movements between components4

Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
4How

broad-based is the increase in UK inflation? (G. Potjagailo, B.Wanengkirtyo and J. Lam, 2022) [link]

High frequency measures help us to understand
changes in momentum

Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
7

Households’ inflation expectations have fallen, but remain
elevated
Bank/Ipsos and Citigroup/YouGov one-year
household inflation expectations

Sources: Inflation attitudes survey and Citigroup/YouGov
and Bank calculations.

Citigroup/YouGov one-year ahead inflation
expectations distribution

Sources: Citigroup/YouGov and Bank calculations.
8

As DMP business inflation expectations also remain elevated
Decision Maker Panel CPI and own price
expectations

Sources: DMP survey.
5Firm
6Text

Decision Maker Panel text analysis5,6

Sources: DMP survey and Bank calculations.

inflation expectations in quantitative and text data (G. Thwaites, I. Yotzov, Ö. Öztürk, P. Mizen, P. Bunn, N. Bloom, . Anayi, 2022) [link]
analysis of reasons for firms’ own price expectations in 12 months time, August to October DMP surveys. Data are for August-October 2022 period

9

The high inflation environment is driving pay growth
Models show inflation expectations are the main
contributor to pay growth…

…and results from our Agents’ survey corroborate
this story

Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
Sources: DMP survey.
10

With pay contributing to underlying strength in services inflation
Median and underlying measures appear better correlated with pay than headline services

Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
11

