Supply and demand during and after the pandemic
Speech given by
Michael Saunders
External Member of the Monetary Policy Committee
Bank of England

Online webinar
26 March 2021

The views expressed here are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the
Monetary Policy Committee. I would particularly like to thank Lena Anayi, Andre Moreira, and
Matt Swannell for their help in preparing this speech. I have received helpful comments from
Andrew Bailey, John Barrdear, Ben Broadbent, Jonathan Haskel, David Latto, John Lewis,
Rebecca Maule, Nick Mclaren, Mette Nielsen, Dave Ramsden, Kate Reinold, Fiona Shaikh,
Tom Smith, Brad Speigner, Silvana Tenreyro and Gertjan Vlieghe, for which I am most grateful.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

As well as reducing economic activity sharply over the last year, the pandemic has also had large effects on
the economy’s potential output. 1 In this speech, I want to discuss some issues in measuring potential output
and the amount of spare capacity in the economy at present, and some risks around the outlook for supply
and demand.2 I will then turn to some considerations for monetary policy. I will make several main points.


The pandemic and associated restrictions have significantly reduced potential output over recent
quarters, but the majority of these effects are likely to be fairly temporary.



I put more weight on the risk that the central forecast in the February MPR overstated the temporary
drop in potential output over the last year (and hence understated the extent of spare capacity in the
economy at present) and was overly pessimistic on the path for potential output in the year ahead.



In coming months, swings in energy prices are likely to lift CPI inflation, while the easing of
restrictions is likely to boost economic activity. With potential output also likely to be recovering,
increases in activity and headline inflation by themselves may not signal much either way as to
whether spare capacity is rising or falling.



The recent level of activity is well below the likely post-pandemic path of potential output, in other
words its efficient level once temporary adverse effects on potential output of the pandemic fade.3



In order for the output gap to close sustainably and return inflation to target on a sustained basis,
activity needs to close the shortfall with post-pandemic potential output.4 In my view, the MPR
forecast for unemployment three years ahead (4½%) is likely to be a useful benchmark in judging
the extent to which this has been achieved.

Let’s start with the economy’s current position. The pandemic and associated restrictions have caused
economic activity to fall sharply, and the level of real GDP in Q4-2020 was 8% down from Q4-2019. GDP in
Q1 this year probably has fallen further below the Q4-19 level. These declines are much bigger than in any
recession of recent decades. But the pandemic (and associated restrictions) have also reduced potential
output. Some parts of the economy have been shut or restricted and, in many others, workers and firms have
been unable to operate as normal. In the February MPR, the MPC judged that the recent drop in GDP has
been largely matched by a drop in potential GDP, and hence would not put commensurate downward
pressure on inflation.

1

See Bailey (2021) and Haldane (2021). Potential output can be loosely defined as the level of output consistent with keeping inflation
on target over time.
The MPC publishes a full assessment of the economic outlook four times per year in the Monetary Policy Report. This speech uses the
February MPR (the most recent) as the reference point in discussing issues relating to potential output and spare capacity. The next
MPR will be published in early May.
3
See Gali (2015).
4
See Vlieghe (2020).
2

2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

2

Figure 1. UK – Change in Real GDP and Potential GDP since Q4-2019
5

%
0

‐5

‐10
GDP (Feb 2021 MPR Forecast)

‐15

Potential Output (Feb 2021 MPR Forecast)
‐20
Potential Output (Jan 2020 MPR Forecast)
‐25
2019Q4

2020Q4

2021Q4

2022Q4

Sources: ONS and Bank of England.

Estimates of potential GDP are inherently uncertain. In normal times (eg pre-pandemic), potential output and
its growth rate are often estimated from a production function approach, using trends in the growth of the
workforce, capital stock and total factor productivity. Or they can be derived as the residual from output gap
estimates and the level of GDP.5 The resultant estimates for potential GDP growth usually do not change
much from year to year, and are usually not affected much by short-term swings in economic activity.
However, the pandemic has affected potential output through various channels that may be hard to model
using those traditional approaches. The February MPR includes a range of estimated effects.6


Furlough. The approach in the MPR is to treat furloughed workers as largely removed from the
workforce, except to the extent that they are actively looking for another job (and hence pushing
down on pay growth).7 Hence, with this approach, a rise in furloughed workers largely represents a
temporary drop in potential output via reduced labour supply, rather than spare capacity.



Public sector measurement. The output of government services that are consumed by individuals
is often measured using volume indicators, such as the number of hospital operations and the
number of school pupils taught. During the last year, and especially during the first lockdown, a lot of

5

There are various methods of deriving output gap estimates, including filters and bottom-up estimates based on measures of capacity
use in firms, the labour market and so forth. See Tenreyro (2019).
6
The November 2020 MPR and Ramsden (2020) include extensive discussion of these issues.
7
In the LFS, the share of furloughed workers who were looking for another job was 5% in Q2, rising to 10% in Q3 – the latest data at the
time of the February MPR.
3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

3

routine healthcare was postponed. Schools have been temporarily closed during some of the
lockdowns and have recently reopened. All this affects measured real government output. Provided
schools stay open as planned, education output is likely to recover significantly in March and in Q2
this year (although it may continue to be affected by quarantine and self-isolation). In the MPR, these
swings are treated as potential GDP and do not affect the output gap.


Temporary effects on productivity. It is likely that the pandemic (and associated restrictions) has
affected productivity through various channels, some positive and some negative. The MPR
assumes that people newly working from home because of government restrictions and social
distancing are materially less productive than usual. Moreover, there has been some Covid-related
disruption to trade (especially in early 2020), and additional Covid-related costs and workplace
inefficiencies which may also have had some temporary adverse effects on productivity. Against this,
there is a large positive composition effect on aggregate productivity – akin to a “batting average”
effect – because the drop in hours worked has been relatively concentrated in sectors with low
average productivity levels. In the MPR, these effects largely offset each other in Q4 last year.



Temporary effects on structural unemployment. Increases in medium- and (especially) long-term
unemployment may put upward pressure on the NAIRU (the short-term equilibrium jobless rate) and
hence reduce potential output.8 Thus far, long-term unemployment has risen only slightly, but it is
likely to rise further as the overall jobless rate increases in coming quarters, and then decline later
than the overall jobless rate (so that the long-term unemployed will account for a rising share of total
unemployment). In the MPR, this significantly reduces potential GDP for a period late this year and
in 2022. But this effect is likely to be temporary. Unless the jobless rate subsequently rises again,
medium- and long-term unemployment will gradually fall during next year, such that the NAIRU
declines again. In the MPR forecast, this effect is largely unwound at a two-year horizon.



Longer term effects on productivity. The drop in business investment during the pandemic, and
some future drag on investment from wider credit spreads, are likely to reduce innovation and the
capital stock (relative to pre-pandemic expectations). In addition, those who have been unemployed
or furloughed during the pandemic are assumed to suffer some loss of human capital compared to
those in continuous work.



Longer term effects on structural unemployment. Changes in the pattern of demand in the
economy are likely to lead to some reallocation of resources that may increase labour market
mismatch, albeit much less than in the 1980s. In the MPR, this adds slightly to the structural
unemployment rate over time.

8

See pages 17-29 of Inflation Report of February 2018.
4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

4

Based on this, the February MPR estimated that potential GDP in Q4-2020 was 7-8% below the Q4-2019
level and (given the further rise in restrictions and furlough) that potential GDP in Q1 would be about 11%
down from Q4-19.9 The MPR forecast implies that these adverse effects on potential GDP are likely to be
largely temporary. Some of the adverse effects should diminish quite quickly (eg furlough, disruptions to
trade, effects on health and education output). Others were expected to fade over the next year or two as the
economy recovers (eg WFH effects on productivity, upward pressure on NAIRU from medium- and long-term
unemployment).10 Others were judged likely to increase over the coming year and persist for longer (eg
labour market mismatch, lower capital stock). In the MPR, these persistent effects reduce potential output by
1¾% two or three years ahead compared to the pre-pandemic path.
Given this estimated path for potential output, the February MPR estimated the output gap (ie gap between
GDP and potential output) was ½%-¾% of GDP in Q4-2020. With GDP in Q1-2021 forecast in the February
MPR to be 12% down from Q4-2019, the MPR projected the output gap in Q1 this year would be about 1%
of potential GDP. That output gap, while material, is actually not much more spare capacity than the
estimated pre-pandemic level of Q4-19 (¼%-½% of GDP).

Table 1. UK – February 2021 MPR Projections
Projections
Q1-2021

Q1-2022

Q1-2023

Q1-2024

GDP growth

-9.2

14.2

1.3

1.3

CPI inflation

0.8

2.1

2.1

2.0

LFS unemployment rate

5.5

5.7

5.0

4.5

Excess supply/Excess demand

-1

+¼

+¼

0

Bank Rate (market path)

0.1

-0.1

-0.1

0.0

Note: modal projections for GDP, CPI inflation, LFS unemployment and excess supply/excess demand. GDP projection is four quarter
growth. CPI inflation projection is the four-quarter inflation rate. The path for Bank Rate is the market path at the time, which is the usual
conditioning assumption for the MPC’s forecasts. Source: Bank of England.

The February MPR assumed that restrictions would gradually ease between end-March and end-September,
which would lead to a recovery in activity, alongside a boost from the substantial monetary and fiscal policy
stimulus in place at the time. In that forecast, GDP and potential output started to recover in Q2, and the
recovery would be strong enough to close the output gap – and indeed to lift the economy slightly into
excess demand – late this year. In the central forecast, the jobless rate was projected to rise over the
summer as the furlough scheme ends, but fall back to about 5¾% in Q1 2022 and to about 4½% three years

9
The MPR forecast for potential GDP also includes estimates for effects of Brexit, both temporary and persistent. These did not change
much over the period, other than the assumption of greater trade frictions in early 2021, which lower actual GDP and potential GDP by
1% in that quarter. This effect reverses subsequently.
10
The adverse effect on productivity from those newly required to work from home was assumed to fade by the end of this year, as
effects from government restrictions and social distancing end. This could be consistent with either less WFH or a lower impact on
productivity from WFH. The effect on the equilibrium unemployment rate from higher medium- and long-term unemployment was
projected to largely fade at a two-year horizon.
5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

5

ahead.11 In that central forecast, swings in energy prices cause headline CPI inflation to rise close to the 2%
target in Q2 this year. Thereafter, the closing of the output gap would lift core inflation such that headline
inflation stayed around the 2% target next year and subsequently.

Risks Around the Path and Outlook for Potential Output
The concept that the pandemic and associated restrictions have affected potential GDP (as well as actual
GDP) is reasonable in my view. However, the potential GDP estimates in the MPR have large margins of
error. This is in part because each component is measured with some uncertainty, and the channels included
in the MPR may not cover all the supply-side effects of the pandemic. By varying slightly the estimates, it is
not hard to produce potential output estimates that differ by several percentage points of GDP. With actual
GDP currently also measured with considerable uncertainty, the resultant output gap estimates are likely to
be very uncertain indeed.
For myself, I find it hard to reconcile the top-down estimates that the output gap is modest and little changed
over the last year with a range of other indicators which suggest that spare capacity in the economy
has risen markedly over the last year. For example, since Q4-2019, the jobless rate has risen by slightly
more than 1pp (from 3.8% to 5.0%), while under-employment has also risen on a range of measures.12 At
the same time, business surveys suggest that capacity use in firms (weighted across manufacturing and
services) is clearly below average. All this is consistent with a much greater rise (and a higher level) of spare
capacity than implied by the estimate in the February MPR.13

11

Since the MPR, the Budget 2021 included measures that will affect activity, potential output and unemployment in the near-term and
over the three-year forecast period. The MPC will consider the effects of these measures in the May MPR.
12
Various measures of under-employment – including part-time workers who cannot find a full time job, temporary workers who cannot
find a permanent job, people outside the workforce who would like to work, and people who would like to work more hours (including
among non-furloughed staff) – have all risen since Q4-2019.
13
As an illustration, a 1.2pp rise in the jobless rate would, using an Okun style relation, normally be consistent with a rise in the output
gap of roughly 2½% of potential GDP. The implied output gap would be greater if, as in the February MPR, we also regard part of those
on furlough as effectively unemployed. The OBR’s output gap estimate points to less spare capacity than the February MPR early this
year but more spare capacity late this year. The OECD and IMF estimates also point to higher spare capacity (but are a bit less timely).
6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

6

Figure 2. UK – Guides to Spare Capacity in the Economy
3
2
1
0
‐1
‐2
‐3
Capacity Use in Firms (SD From Avge)
‐4

YoY Change in Unemployment Rate (pp)

‐5

YoY Change in Under‐Employment Rate (pp)

‐6
2000

2003

2006

2009

2012

2015

2018

2021

Note: Capacity use in firms is weighted across manufacturing, services and (where available) the retail sector. The series is an average
of surveys from the CBI, British Chambers of Commerce, BoE Agents and Markit PMI. An increase in the pink and green lines implies a
rise in spare capacity, as does a drop in the blue line. Sources: IHS Markit/CIPS, CBI, BCC, ONS and Bank of England.

It is hard to disentangle clear signals of spare capacity from recent price and cost data. This is partly
because of lags.14 It is also because some of the data are more noisy and uncertain than usual at present.15
In addition, price data may currently be affected by various temporary factors (eg changes in energy prices,
taxes, Covid-related health costs), while both prices and pay may be being affected by shifts in the
composition of activity.16 Nevertheless, there are hints of a material rise in spare capacity over the last year.
For example, various measures suggest that services inflation, which tends to respond relatively closely to
changes in the output gap, has slowed compared to Q4-2019 and compared to the 2018-19 average (a
period in which the MPC judge the economy had a modest output gap of about ½% of GDP on average).

14

BoE staff estimates suggest that a rise in the output gap of 1% of potential GDP has no significant effect on annual CPI inflation in the
next quarter, reduces inflation by 0.2pp after three quarters and by 0.4pp after five quarters.
For example, in February, the share of the CPI basket unavailable for collection was 10.7%, up from 3.9% in December.
16
See Broadbent (2021). Slaughter (2021) highlights the importance of composition effects on recent data for pay growth.
15

7

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

7

Figure 3. UK – Measures of Services Sector Inflation

3
%

2018‐19 Average

2.5

Q4 2019
Latest

2
1.5
1
0.5
0
CPI Services

Core CPI
Services

Median CPI
Services

Median
Services Ex
EOHO and
VAT

Services
Producer
Prices

Agents Scores Agents Scores
‐‐ Consumer
‐‐ B2B
Services
Services
prices
Prices

Note: Core CPI services excludes airfares, package holidays, education and the effects of VAT changes. The second median CPI
services measure excludes the effects of the Eat Out to Help Out Scheme as well as changes in VAT. The Agents scores are not
percentages but ordinal scores based on a range from -5 to +5; a score of 1 is stronger than 0 (no change) but weaker than 2 (average
growth rate for that variable). The latest Agents scores are for the three months up to mid-February compared with the same period a
year ago. The latest figures are Q4-2020 for services producer prices and the three months ended February 2021 for the CPI series.
Sources: ONS and Bank of England.

So what is going on?
There are some measurement issues around the LFS at present. But, in my view, it is unlikely that the
signals from these capacity use guides are all wrong.17 In theory, it is possible that GDP really has fallen
more than shown by the ONS data. But I think the most likely outcome is that potential output over the last
year has not fallen as much as the estimate in the February MPR. There are several possible factors that
could explain this.
One issue is that, while the pandemic and its side effects have probably hit potential output through some
channels, they have also prompted technological gains and accelerated the use of existing
technologies in ways that have been (and will probably continue to be) positive for potential output.18
The Banks’ Agents report that the shutdown or forced adjustment of many processes in response to Covid
has enabled firms to reassess their efficiency, and to a greater extent than during the financial crisis and
recession of 2008-09.

17

If anything, the LFS data may understate the actual rise in unemployment, given that other indicators suggest greater declines in
employment than the LFS data, and that the LFS employment data include a substantial number of people who say they are in work, but
are working no hours and receiving no pay.
18
See Haldane (2020b).
8

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

8

An example is the shift to digital. The DMP survey suggests that, across a wide range of businesses, the
proportion of total sales that were delivered online rose from 46% in 2019 to 62% in Q1-2021. Over the long
term (ie 2022 and beyond), firms expect more half of total sales (53%) to be delivered online, an increase of
7pp on 2019.19
The retail sector – which had already been seeing relatively high productivity growth in the couple of years
before the pandemic – has been at the forefront of this shift to digital.20 With the switch to online sales,
productivity (measured by GVA per hour) in the retail sector rose by 20% in the first three quarters of last
year, the biggest rise since data began more than 20 years ago and indeed a bigger gain than over the prior
ten years combined (the rise from Q4-2009 to Q4-2019 was 12%). Some of this may reflect a composition
effect from the forced closure of non-essential stores, and may partly reverse as non-essential stores
reopen. But, provided the share of online sales remains well above pre-pandemic levels, some of these
productivity gains will probably persist. The shift to online shopping is also likely to promote greater price
transparency and reduce barriers to entry (and expansion) among small retailers, hence increasing
competitive pressures.21 Another example of the impact of this shift to digital may be that productivity in office
and administrative services in Q3 last year rose by more than 20% YoY. Likewise, the wider use of video
calls and reduced business travel is likely to generate substantial time savings.
The effects of working from home (WFH) on potential output during the pandemic also may turn out to be
less one-sided than assumed in the February MPR. Moreover, a persistent increase in WFH (from
pre-pandemic levels) seems likely, and may well actually support potential output over time.
The DMP survey suggests that remote working only accounted for around 8% of total hours worked in 2019
(and 13.5% of employees were fully or partly remote working). With the Covid pandemic and mandatory
“stay-at-home” policies, the share of hours accounted for by remote working rose to 43% in Q1-2021, with
49% of employees fully or partly remote working. It is likely that compulsory WFH on this scale has hurt
productivity for some firms, for example because the lack of face to face contact makes close collaboration
and knowledge sharing with colleagues more difficult, which may hinder innovation.22

19

The survey also shows a rise in the share of sales that are ordered online and collected in person 0.5% in 2019 to 3.2% in Q1 this
year and an expected level of 2.0% of sales in 2022 onwards. This is expected to account for a relatively high share of sales in retailing
and wholesaling, accommodation and food services, recreational services and manufacturing.
20
See Tenreyro (2020) and Saunders (2020a).
21
Small retailers (employment level below 100 people) have a relatively high market share in online sales. With the switch to online
sales, retail sales volumes (ex fuel) for small retailers rose 17.4% YoY in Q4-2020, the highest growth since data began in 1989. The
volume of sales for large retailers (employment of 100 people or more) rose 1.7% YoY.
22
See Battiston et al. (2017) and Bloom et al. (2020).
9

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

9

Figure 4. UK – DMP Survey on Percentage of Sales that are Online

90
80

%

2019

2021Q1

2022 Onwards (Expected)

70
60
50
40
30
20

Note: Data are based on responses to the question: “In each of the following periods, approximately what percentage of your
sales/services was delivered/do you expected to be delivered in the following ways? Survey period 5-19 Feb 2021. Source: Bank of
England.

Figure 5. UK – DMP Survey on Percentage of Total Hours Worked Remotely Among UK Firms

90
80
70

%

2019
2021 Q1
2022 Onwards (Expected)

60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Note: DMP survey period was 5-19 February 2021. Source: Bank of England.

10

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

10

However, while a shift to widespread compulsory full WFH probably is not optimal, WFH offers a range of
possible advantages for some firms. These include more efficient use of the business capital stock and cost
reduction, including savings on city centre office space (or, equivalently, you could regard WFH as an
expansion of the business capital stock, because more of the stock of housing, domestic ICT and home
furniture is now used for work). It is likely to allow some firms to access a wider pool of staff (for example,
people that cannot easily get to a specific work location), and to better match jobs to skills, while leading to
reduced absence from sickness (which may include caring responsibilities for family members).23 For some
people, the option to WFH also seems to be good for employee satisfaction and productivity, because of
reduced distractions and a quieter work environment, as well as advantages from a better work-life
balance.24 This may lead to better staff retention, and hence improved work skills, as well as cost savings
from lower staff turnover. By cutting commuting time and costs, increased WFH is likely to expand labour
supply, by allowing more people to enter the workforce (or stay in the workforce for longer).25
The ONS BICS results suggest that more firms report adverse effects on their productivity from increased
remote working over the last year than report positive effects. However, there is a clear effect of firm size: in
general, larger firms are much more positive in their attitude to remote working than smaller firms. Weighted
by firm size (number of employees), the share of firms reporting positive effects on productivity from remote
working over the last year has been similar to the share reporting adverse effects (averaged over recent
months). There is some variation across sectors: adverse effects dominate in, for example, accommodation
and food services, arts and entertainment, construction, administration and support services. Positive effects
dominate in real estate, professional and scientific activities, ICT and health services. Similarly, a recent
survey of people working from home found a modest balance reporting positive effects on their productivity.26
The relative scale of these advantages and disadvantages is likely to vary among different jobs and people
in the same firm. For the economy as a whole, the relationship between these effects is likely to be
hump-shaped. Now that we have overcome initial barriers of learning how to operate home working in many
jobs, some degree of WFH and flexibility around its scale probably boosts potential output. But when WFH
hours are too high and compulsory WFH predominates, adverse effects take over and potential output might
fall.27
The DMP survey suggests that on average, firms expect that around 20% of total hours will be worked
remotely in in the next few years (2022 onwards) – compared to 8% pre-pandemic. The results suggest the
persistent shift to WFH will be especially marked in professional services, real estate services and ICT. The

23

See Felstead and Reuschke (2020), CIPD (2020 a, b, c), Bloom et al. (2015), Mas and Pallais (2017), Haldane (2020a).
See Chung et al (2020), and YouGov poll of workers in London, 16-19 November 2020.
See Kun et al (2020) and Barrero et al (2020). Eurostat data (released 21 October 2020) show that, in 2019, UK workers spent on
average one hour per day travelling to and from work – about 20% above the EU average (and indeed above all EU countries except
Latvia). Until the pandemic, the average commuting time had been gradually rising over time.
26
See Taneja et al (2021), as well as Felstead and Reuschke (2020)..
27
See Coenen and Kok (2014), Kazekami (2020), Gajendran and Harrison (2007), Anayi and Robinson (2021), Behrens et al (2021).
24
25

11

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

11

BICS survey gives a similar message, with a sizeable share of firms in all sectors expecting higher remote
working in future years than the pre-pandemic level.
Figure 6. UK – BICS Survey Responses on Effects of Remote Working During and After the Pandemic

60
Pct Reporting Productivity Has Increased Due to WFH

50
40

Pct Reporting Productivity Has Decreased Due to WFH
Net Balance Reporting Positive Effect on Productivity
Pct Intending to Make More Use of Remote Working

30
20
10
0
‐10

%

‐20

Note: WFH Working from Home. Results weighted by the number of employees and averaged across Waves 16-22, covering the period
from mid-Sep 2020 to mid-Jan 2021. The fourth series shows the share of firms that “intend to use increased homeworking as a
permanent business model going forward”. This work contains statistical data from ONS which is Crown Copyright. The use of the ONS
statistical data in this work does not imply the endorsement of the ONS in relation to the interpretation or analysis of the statistical data.
This work uses research datasets which may not exactly reproduce National Statistics aggregates. Sources: ONS and Bank of England.

Figure 7. UK – DMP Survey – Firms’ Expectations for Change in Percentage of Employees that will be
Working from Home, Comparing 2022 Onwards with 2019 (as a share of total employees)

60

1 day/ week

50

2 days/ week

40

4 days/ week

30

Total Expected Change in WFH (Full or Partial)

3 days/ week
5 days/ week

20
10
0
‐10

pp

Note: The results are based on the question ‘How often did your full-time employees work from home/how often do you expect them to
work from home in the following periods (2019, 2021 Q1 and 2022+)?’ Respondents were able to provide percentages for the following
categories: (i) one day per week; (ii) two days per week; (iii) three days per week; (iv) four days per week; (v) five or more days per
week; (vi) work from home rarely. A figure of, for example, 10pp indicate that on average firms expect a 10pp rise in the share of total
employees that will be working from home for this specified number of days. Source: Bank of England.
12

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

12

Many firms are looking to make more use of a hybrid model whereby people are partly remote working, to
combine the various benefits of WFH with the benefits of collaboration if people work in the same place as
their colleagues at least some of the time.28 The BICS results suggest that, among firms that intend to use
more WFH, the main factors cited are reduced overheads, higher employee satisfaction, higher productivity,
the ability to access a wider pool of staff, to better match jobs to skills, and reduced absence from sickness.
While this shift to persistently higher remote working may create challenges in how firms enable collaborative
working, in my view it also may have positive effects on the future path of potential output in terms of labour
supply, labour productivity and a more efficient use of the capital stock compared to the old pre-pandemic
model (and the February MPR assumptions).
Another issue that may be supporting potential output is that the contribution of furloughed staff to spare
capacity (and potential output) may be higher than assumed in the February MPR. This is in part
because, with the pandemic (and furlough) having persisted for so long, a rising share of those on furlough
are seeking work elsewhere. Since the MPR, new LFS data suggest that the share of furloughed workers
searching for another job rose to 13% in Q4-2020, from 10% in Q3 and 5% in Q2. Separate data from a
survey for the Resolution Foundation suggest that, among furloughed workers, the share searching for
another job is relatively high for those who have experienced a longer cumulative period in furlough over the
last year, possibly because this group also perceive the risk of losing their job to be relatively high.29 As the
pandemic has rolled on, a rising share of furloughed workers fall into this persistent furlough category,
perhaps accumulating repeated spells of furlough.30 Job search rates are also relatively high among those
who are currently working but have been furloughed previously, especially those furloughed for a long
period.
In addition, the job search measure among furloughed workers used in the MPR estimate is quite narrow. It
relies on a question in the LFS that asks people whether they looked for another job in the last week, a
relatively brief period. By contrast, in judging whether people who are out of work count as actively looking
for work for the unemployment figures, the LFS asks whether they looked for work in the last four weeks, a
much wider window. The RF survey, which simply asks people whether they are looking for another job,
found a job search rate of over 20% among furloughed workers.

28

The DMP survey suggests that firms expect the share of full-time employees that are fully or partly remote working to rise to 34% in
the next few years compared to 13.5% in 2019. Within this, firms expect the share of employees that will be remote working for part of
the week to rise from 8% in 2019 to 27% for 2022 onwards. The share of employees expected to be remote working 5 days per week is
expected to rise only slightly, to 7.3% in 2022 onwards from 5.5% in 2019.
29
See Cominetti et al (2021).
30
The RF data suggest that among people on furlough, slightly more than half had more than six months cumulative furlough in
January. Given the furlough scheme was only launched in late March 2020, this share was zero in Q2 and most of Q3 last year.
13

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

13

Figure 8. UK – Percentage of People Who Are Searching For Another Job

25

Searching for Another Job Now
Will Start Searching for Another Job in Next Three Months

20
15

%

10
5
0
All People
Working
Now

Working
Now, Never
Furloughed

Working
Now, Have
Been
Furloughed
<6 Months

Working
Now, Have
Been
Furloughed
> 6 Months

Furloughed Furloughed
All
Furloughed Now, Total Now, Total
Furlough <6 Furlough >6
Workers
months
months

Note: Data surveyed 22-26 January 2021. The period for which people have been furloughed is measured on a cumulative basis, and
may include more than one spell of furlough. This analysis was undertaken independently by the Bank of England. Base by categories:
All people working now = 3419; Working now, never furloughed = 2952; Working now, have been furloughed <6 months = 421; Working
now, have been furloughed >6 months = 46; All furloughed workers = 481; Furloughed now, total furlough <6 months = 211; Furloughed
now, total furlough>6 months = 270. Sources: Resolution Foundation and Bank of England.

Moreover, in my view, some furloughed workers also may contribute to spare capacity even if not searching
for another job. Some firms have furloughed staff because of weak demand, even though people are not
prevented from buying their goods and services. For example, in January this year, around 10% of jobs were
furloughed in construction, real estate services, manufacturing and professional services (sectors that have
stayed open). Similarly, roughly 30% of furloughed jobs are flexible furlough (January data), whereby people
work part-time and the employer can vary their paid hours. In my view, such workers may in part contribute
to spare capacity in the economy regardless of whether they are looking for another job, in the same way
that people who would like to work more hours are included in estimates of spare capacity.
Looking ahead, I am also unsure – indeed, a bit doubtful – of the MPR estimate for the extent to which
higher unemployment will lift structural unemployment later this year. There is evidence that the job finding
rate among longer term unemployed is relatively low.31 Moreover, the past experience of our standard filter is
that the estimated NAIRU (the UK equilibrium jobless rate that best explains the observed behaviour of
wages, based on a Phillips curve relationship) tends to drift up when the jobless rate has been elevated for a
while.32 However, when tested directly, the relation between unemployment and pay growth does not seem

31
32

See Krueger et al (2014) for a discussion of this in the US context.
See pages 17-29 of the BoE Inflation Report of February 2018.
14

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

14

to be affected by changes in the share of long-term unemployment (see Appendix).33 In other words, high
unemployment tends to reduce pay growth irrespective of whether it is short- or long-term unemployment
that is high. If rising long-term unemployment does not lift structural unemployment as much as implied by
the MPR (if at all), then this would imply upside risks to potential output late this year and during next year
relative to the MPR forecast. This issue that higher long-term unemployment may temporarily reduce
potential output may in any case matter less now, given that the extension of the furlough scheme is likely to
lower the near term path for unemployment – and hence the path for long-term unemployment – compared
to the February MPR.
This is not an exhaustive list of uncertainties over potential output.34 But, overall, my hunch is that the
temporary adverse effects of the pandemic on potential output have been smaller, and will fade more quickly,
than the MPR assumption.
The first two factors (the shift to digital, more remote working) – as well as a lower near-term unemployment
path – may also imply that the MPR estimate for longer term scarring on potential output (1¾% of GDP) will
turn out to be too pessimistic. But for that longer term outlook, there are also some risks on the downside.
For example, there are signs of a substantial outflow of foreign workers over the last year35 which, if it has
occurred and persists, could imply a smaller workforce. Nor does the MPR allow for the possibility that the
pandemic will lower participation, for example because of health effects on some people or decisions by
some older workers to retire earlier.36 There is (and probably will continue to be) plenty of uncertainty around
the long-term effects on potential output of the pandemic – but the effects may not all be adverse.
Risks Around the Outlook for Demand
Data so far suggest that Q1 GDP will be less weak than expected in the February MPR, and the outlook for
activity in Q2 also is probably better than in the MPR central forecast. This partly reflects the effects of higher
government output. But, in addition, since the MPR, Covid infections, hospitalisations and deaths have
continued to fall rapidly, while the vaccination program has continued at pace. The current plans envisage
that restrictions across the UK will be eased somewhat more rapidly than assumed in the February MPR.37
Moreover, the recent Budget provided significant further near-term support for the economy.
There are some upside possibilities for demand further ahead. For example, the household saving rate might
fall faster over the next year or two than assumed in the MPR, reflecting pent-up demand as households run
down a higher share of the stock of savings built up over the last year. If there is less damage to the supply
33

Evidence on this is mixed. Kiley (2014), Bell and Blanchflower (2014) and Speigner (2014) reach similar conclusions, while Llaudes
(2005) has a different view.
34
It is also worth noting the sharp rise in the number of company incorporations in the UK, which rose 13% YoY in 2020 and reached a
record high. In the first 11 weeks of 2021, the number of company incorporations rose 18% YoY.
35
See O’Connor and Portes (2021), and ONS analysis “Coronavirus and the impact on payroll employment”, released 23 March 2021.
36
See OBR (2021).
37
The MPR assumed that restrictions ease gradually from end-March to end-September, whereas the roadmap envisages that
restrictions could be ended by late June, depending on various conditions.
15

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

15

side from the pandemic, then this should also support demand over time, because households and firms will
anticipate stronger future real gains in incomes and activity.
But there are also downside risks, on the side of a slower recovery over time. There probably will continue to
be lingering risks that viral mutations could trigger a renewed rise in infections and restrictions over the next
year or two (which could also affect potential output). Firms may be cautious over hiring and investment until
it is clear that the pandemic is definitely finished. The slower pace of vaccinations in many other countries
may prolong these risks, and require continued restrictions in other countries which could affect UK exports.
Business spending in the UK may also be restrained by the overhang from the rise in corporate debts during
the pandemic.38 Household spending may be restrained by pressure among some households to rebuild
savings that have been run down during the crisis, and fears of job losses after furlough ends. The rise in
aggregate household savings has been concentrated in higher income households and the elderly, who
typically have a relatively low marginal propensity to consume out of both income and wealth.39 In total,
roughly as many households report their savings have fallen as risen. The share of households reporting
their savings have fallen is especially marked in the lower half of the income distribution, as well as among
those who have been furloughed and self-employed workers. Moreover, the recent Budget increased the
medium-term tightening in fiscal policy.
Figure 9. UK – Percentage of People Intending to Spend More/Less In The Future Compared to PrePandemic Level

50
45

%

40

Will Spend
Will Spend
Will Spend
Will Spend
Split By Annual Income

Less ‐‐ Lost Income and Income Uncertainty
Less ‐‐ Health Uncertainty
the Same
More ‐‐ Catchup
Split By Change
Split By Change in Savings
In Income During
During Pandemic
Pandemic

<£20k

>55k

35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

All
People

£20‐35k £35‐55k

Down

Unch

Up

No
Savings

Saved
Less

Unch

Saved
More

Note: The question is “As you will probably know, a vaccine for Covid-19 is now being rolled out in the UK, and the government expects
this to allow an easing of restrictions in the future. Once restrictions are lifted, how do you expect your spending will change compared
to how it was before the pandemic began?”, sample period 26 February 2021 to 1 March 2021. Sources: Ipsos/MORI and Bank of
England.

38
39

See Demmou et al (2021).
See Nourse et al (2020).
16

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

16

In addition to balance sheet repair, psychological scarring from this turbulent period, which has seen the
economy shrink by 20% with repeated lockdowns, could cause households and businesses to factor in
greater uncertainty and downside risks about their future income prospects, hence leading them to save
more (and aim for more resilient balance sheets) than the pre-Covid period.
Thus far, it is unclear whether, beyond Q2, upside or downside risks around the MPR forecast will dominate.
A sizeable share of people expect that they will remain cautious over spending even as restrictions ease
because of financial worries and health uncertainties, especially among those whose incomes or savings
have fallen during the crisis. The drag from health worries might well fade as vaccinations proceed, but it will
be important to see the extent to which this affects consumers’ willingness to spend in coming months.
***
Let me sum up the argument so far and make some wider points. In my view, there are reasons to conclude
that the adverse effects of the pandemic on potential output over the last year and for the year ahead may
not be quite as large as assumed in the February MPR. Hence, even if Q1 GDP turns out higher than
forecast in the MPR, in my view it might still be reasonable to conclude that the output gap is higher than
expected. And my hunch, taking account of a somewhat more optimistic assessment of the outlook for
potential output, is that it will take longer to close the output gap than forecast in the February MPR.
In any case, whatever one’s view of the scale of the adverse effects on potential output from the pandemic
recently and the next few quarters, a key point is that many of these adverse effects are likely to be
temporary. The same factors that will lift activity (eg reduced restrictions) will also lift potential output towards
its long-term path. In addition, the path of potential output is likely to be endogenous.40 A stronger recovery
would probably imply less business failures, fewer staff furloughed for a long period of time, less rise in
long-term unemployment, more spending on investment and training etc and hence less damage to potential
output near-term and further ahead.41 As a result, a forecast that activity will rise strongly in coming quarters
may not by itself tell us whether spare capacity will be rising, falling or stable.
Moreover, while it is the output gap – the gap between activity and potential output – which matters for
inflation, this measure does not fully describe the degree of resource use in the economy at present. An
output gap estimate of 1% of GDP in Q1 this year would not imply that GDP in Q1 was only 1% away from a
normal level of activity, or that a 1% overshoot in GDP relative to forecast would sustainably close the output
gap. For this, it is useful to consider the shortfall of activity relative to the likely post-pandemic path for
potential output once temporary effects fade, what one might call the efficient level of output. This shortfall
probably is large now and is unlikely to close in the next few quarters. As long as this shortfall persists, it
would be hard in my view to argue that the output gap has closed sustainably.

40

See Haskel (2021).
Of course, this does not apply to all the likely effects on potential output: for example, the extent of reallocation of labour and capital
between sectors may not be so affected by the pace of growth in the next year or two.

41

17

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

17

How do we measure this shortfall – and hence judge whether the output gap has closed sustainably? Price
and pay data might become more informative, although they may continue to be affected by various
temporary factors for some time. I will probably look more to the unemployment rate (and measures of
under-employment). These measures of slack are unlikely to be affected by uncertainties over the outlook for
productivity and labour supply.42 Moreover, provided inflation expectations remain well anchored, it is likely
that the pandemic will have only a modest persistent effect on the equilibrium jobless rate. In this context, the
MPR forecast that, late this year, the output gap will be closed with the jobless rate above 5½% does not
imply that such a high jobless rate will be consistent with a zero output gap over time. As noted, the MPR
assumed that late this year there will be a temporary rise in structural unemployment caused by higher longterm unemployment. As this effect fades, the MPR projected that three years ahead, the output gap will be
around zero with unemployment at 4½% (allowing for the persistent effect on equilibrium unemployment that
is expected to result from skills mismatch). In my view, that three-year ahead unemployment forecast (4½%)
is likely to be a reasonable benchmark against which to judge whether activity has fully caught up with the
path for post-pandemic potential output and hence closed the output gap sustainably.
Implications for Monetary Policy
Let me discuss some implications of all this for the appropriate setting of monetary policy. At the recent
monetary policy meeting, the Committee retained its guidance which states: “If the outlook for inflation
weakens, the Committee stands ready to take whatever additional action is necessary to achieve its remit.
The Committee does not intend to tighten monetary policy at least until there is clear evidence that significant
progress is being made in eliminating spare capacity and achieving the 2% inflation target sustainably.” This
guidance is two sided. I want to discuss both sides in light of the previous points about the current and
prospective paths of supply and demand in the economy.
The second part of the guidance discusses preconditions for tightening. At face value, one could perhaps
argue that the central MPR forecast – that, late this year, CPI inflation will be around 2% and the output gap
will be closed – might imply the conditions for tightening will be met quite soon. However, it is important to
note the caveats in the guidance. I want to highlight three particular phrases:


“at least until” indicates these conditions are necessary but not sufficient for tightening: the
Committee won’t tighten before those conditions are met and will then judge according to the
situation.



“clear evidence” implies that progress in meeting these conditions should be relatively
unambiguous.

42

See Broadbent (2014).
18

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

18



“sustainably” implies the need to take account of whether demand is supported by factors that are
likely to be relatively temporary. It also implies a distinction between a scenario in which the output
gap is closed while the economy’s potential output is temporarily depressed, and a scenario in which
the output gap is closed with activity regaining its efficient level (ie the path of potential output once
temporary effects fade).

In my view, a jobless rate of well above 5% (the February MPR forecast for Q1-2022 was 5.7%) would
almost certainly indicate that we are some way from closing the output gap sustainably.
Turning to the first part of the guidance, on conditions for loosening. A more persistent output gap would not
prevent headline CPI inflation from rising in coming months, given swings in energy prices. But it would
probably keep core inflation subdued for longer than the MPR projects hence, unless energy prices go on
rising, tilting the medium-term outlook to below-target inflation. Risk management considerations also could
apply, because an incomplete recovery and persistent output gap would be a more costly outcome than a
scenario in which the output gap closes at an earlier date.43
The MPC has ample scope to tighten monetary policy if required to restrain inflation. If easing is required, the
MPC has various options in its toolkit to support the economy. As well as forward guidance and asset
purchases, a zero or negative policy rate will also be feasible from the August policy meeting onwards.44 If
easing is needed, in my view the choice among these policy tools might depend on the circumstances and
allow for any complementarities between them. Having a range of policy options available should reinforce
confidence among households and businesses that the recovery will be sustained even in the event of
adverse shocks.45
Either way, the MPC will, as always, remain focussed on ensuring that inflation returns sustainably to the 2%
target, in a way that supports output and jobs.

43

See Haskel (2020) and Saunders (2020b).
As discussed in the February MPC minutes, the MPC has requested that the PRA should engage with PRA-regulated firms to ensure
they commence preparations in order to be ready to implement a zero or negative Bank Rate at any point from the August MPC meeting
onwards. The MPC also requested that Bank staff should commence internal technical preparations to deliver the option of a tiered
system of reserve remuneration that could be ready to be implemented, if judged appropriate, alongside a negative Bank Rate.
45
See Brando-Marques et al (2021).
44

19

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

19

References
Anayi, L and Robinson, L (2021), ‘How could the recent increase in homeworking affect the economy?’,
Bank Overground.
Bailey, A (2021), ‘Getting over Covid’, speech given at Resolution Foundation.
Barrero, J, Bloom, N and Davis, S (2020), ‘60 million fewer commuting hours per day: how Americans use
time saved by working from home’, Becker Freidman Institute Working Paper, Becker Freidman Institute, No.
2020-132.
Battiston, D, Blanes I Vidal, J and Kirchmaier, T (2017), ‘Is distance dead? Face-to-face communication
and productivity in teams’, CEP Discussion Paper, Centre for Economic Performance, No. 1473.
Behrens, K, Kichko, S and Thisee, J (2021), ‘Working from home: too much of a good thing?’, CESifo
Working Paper Series, CESifo, No. 8831.
Bell, D and Blanchflower, D (2014), ‘Labour market slack in the UK’, National Institute Economic Review,
National Institute of Economic and Social Research, vol. 229, pages F4–F11.
Bloom, N, Bunn, P, Mizen, P, Smietanka, P and Thwaites, G (2020), ‘The impact of Covid-19 on
productivity’, NBER Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research, No. 28233.
Bloom, N, Liang, J, Roberts, J and Ying, Z (2015), ‘Does working from home work? Evidence from a
Chinese experiment’, NBER Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research, No. 18871.
Brando-Marques, L, Casiraghi, M, Gelos, R, Kamber, G and Meeks, R (2021), ‘Negative interest rates:
taking stock of the experience so far’, IMF Departmental Paper, International Monetary Fund, No. 2021/03.
Broadbent, B (2014), ‘Unemployment and the conduct of monetary policy’, speech given at the
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 38th Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming.
Broadbent, B (2021), ‘Covid and the composition of spending’, speech given at an online webinar.
Chung, H, Seo, H, Forbes, S and Birkett, H (2020), ‘Working from home during the Covid-19 lockdown:
changing preferences and the future of work’, The Working from Home Covid-19 project.
CIPD (2000a), ‘Home working set to more than double compared to pre-pandemic levels once crisis is over’,
CIPD press release, Chartered Institute of Personnel Development.
20

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

20

CIPD (2020b), ‘Two thirds of employers report home workers more or as productive as when in the
workplace, but cite need to support their mental health’, CIPD press release,
Chartered Institute of Personnel Development.
CIPD (2020c), ‘Working from home: assessing the research evidence’, CIPD report,
Chartered Institute of Personnel Development.
Coenen, M and Kok, R (2014), ‘Workplace flexibility and new product development performance: the role of
telework and flexible work schedules’, European Management Journal, Elsevier, vol. 32(4), pages 564-576.
Cominetti, N, Henehan, K, Slaughter, H and Thwaites, G (2021), ‘Long Covid in the labour market’,
Resolution Foundation report, Resolution Foundation.
Demmou, L, Calligaria, S, Franco, G, Dlugosch, D, McGowan, M and Sakha, S (2021), ‘Insolvency and
debt overhang following the Covid-19 outbreak assessment of risks and policy responses’, OCED
Economics Department Working Papers, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, No.
1651.
Felstead, A and Reuschke, D (2020), ‘Homeworking in the UK: before and during the 2020 lockdown’,
WISERD Report, Cardiff: Wales Institute for Social and Economic Research.
Gajendran, R and Harrison, D (2007), ‘The good, the bad and the unknown about telecommuting:
meta-analysis of psychological mediators and individual consequences’, Journal of Applied Psychology,
American Psychological Association, vol. 92(6), pages 1524-1541.
Gali, J (2015), ‘Monetary Policy, Inflation and the Business Cycle’, Princeton University Press.
Haldane, A (2020a), ‘Is home working good for you?’, speech given at an online webinar.
Haldane, A (2020b), ‘Seizing the opportunities from digital finance’, speech given at an online webinar.
Haldane, A (2021), ‘Inflation a tiger by the tail’, speech given at an online webinar.
Haskel, J (2020), ‘From lockdown to recovery – the economic effects of Covid-19’, speech given at Imperial
Future Matters online webinar.
Haskel, J (2021), ‘Remarks on challenges to the economic outlook’, speech given at CEPR/Chicago Booth
webinar.

21

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

21

Kazekami, S (2020), ‘Mechanisms to improve labour productivity by performing telework’,
Telecommunications Policy, Elsevier, vol. 44(2).
Kiley, M (2014), ‘An evaluation of the inflationary pressure associated with short- and long-term
unemployment’, Finance and Economics Discussion Series, Federal Reserve Board, No. 2014-28.
Krueger, A, Cramer, J and Cho, D (2014), ‘Are the long-term unemployed on the margins of the labour
market’, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Brookings Institution, Spring 2014.
Kun, A, Sadun, R, Shaer, O and Teodorovicz, T (2020), ‘Where did the commute time go?’,
Harvard Business Review, Harvard University.
Llaudes, R (2005), ‘The Philips curve and long-term unemployment’, ECB Working Paper,
European Central Bank, No. 441.
Mas, A and Pallais, A (2017), ‘Valuing alternative work arrangements’, American Economic Review,
American Economic Association, vol. 107(12), pages 3722-3759, December.
Nourse, C, Tasker, J and Garofalo, M (2020), ‘How has Covid affected household savings?’,
Bank Overground.
OBR (2021), ‘Economic and fiscal outlook’, March 2021.
O’Connor, M and Portes, J (2021), ‘Estimating the UK population during the pandemic’, Regional and
labour market statistics programme, Economic Statistics Centre of Excellence.
ONS (2021), ‘Coronavirus and the impact on payroll employment: experimental analysis’, March 2021.
Ramsden, D (2020), ‘The potential long-term effects of Covid’, speech given at
Institute for Policy and Engagement, University of Nottingham.
Saunders, M (2020a), ‘Michael Saunders’ annual report for the Treasury Select Committee’.
Saunders, M (2020b), ‘Covid-19 and monetary policy’, speech given at an online webinar.
Slaughter, H (2021), ‘Earnings in the Covid-19 crisis’, Earnings Outlook Q1 2021, Resolution Foundation.
Speigner, B (2014), ‘Long-term unemployment and convexity in the Phillips curve’, Bank of England Staff
Working Paper, No. 519.
22

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

22

Taneja, Mizen and Bloom (2021), ‘Working from home is revolutionising the UK labour market’, VoxEU.org,
15 March.
Tenreyro, S (2019), ‘The Elusive Supply Potential’, speech given in Glasgow.
Tenreyro, S (2020), ‘Monetary policy during pandemics: inflation before, during and after Covid-19’, speech
given at an online webinar.
Vlieghe, G (2018), ‘From asymmetry to symmetry: changing risks to the economic outlook’, speech given at
Confederation of British Industry, Birmingham.
Vlieghe, G (2020), ‘Monetary Policy and the Bank of England’s Balance Sheet’, speech given at online
webinar.

23

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

23

Appendix – A Panel Model of Wage Growth
We estimate a sector level wage Philips Curve to determine whether there is an impact from long-term
unemployment on pay growth, over and above the unemployment rate. If labour is mobile across sectors,
theory dictates the aggregate jobless rate is the key determinant of wages. However, the problems
associated with estimating aggregate Phillips Curve are well known. So we have focussed our attention on a
more empirically tractable question.
As a baseline, we take Vlieghe’s (2018) model, updated to cover the years up to 2019, which relates annual
pay growth to lagged pay growth and unemployment within industrial sectors. Sector and time fixed effects
are included to allow for factors that (a) affect each sector on average and that (b) affect all sectors over
time, respectively. The lag of the unemployment rate is used in order to avoid any simultaneity between
wage growth and the jobless rate. The natural log of the unemployment rate and the change in the
unemployment rate are also tested as robustness checks.
The model is estimated on an annual basis. Pay is based on average weekly pay within each sector as
recorded by the Labour Force Survey and includes the earnings accruing to both employees and the
self-employed. Labour market quantities are taken from Labour Force Survey data published by the ONS.
Long-term unemployed are defined as those who have been unemployed for 12 months or more.
The baseline specification (equations (i)-(iii)) clearly shows that pay growth is higher in those sectors where
unemployment is lower. But long-term unemployment has no empirical impact on pay growth over and above
aggregate labour market conditions. Adding the long-term share of the unemployed (equations (iv)-(vi)) does
not yield a statistically significant effect, while the jobless rate remains significant and correctly signed.
Sample: 1999-2019
(i)

(ii)

Dependent variable

(iii)

(v)

(vi)

-0.23***

-0.22***

Pay growth

Pay growth(t-1)

-0.24***

Unemployment rate(t-1)

-0.61***

Log unemp. rate (t-1)

-0.23***

-0.22***

-0.25***
-0.64***

-2.08**

Difference in unemp. rate (t-1)

-2.16**
-0.72***

Long-term share unemp. (t-1)
Sector fixed effect

(iv)

-0.71***
0.04

0.04

0.02

(0.03)

(0.03)

(0.04)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No. of sectors

14

14

14

14

14

14

Year dummies

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Sample size

294

294

294

294

294

294

Note: asterisks denote significance at 10% (*), 5% (**) and 1% (***) level, using Driscoll-Kraay standard errors. Standard errors for the
long-term share of unemployment are reported in parentheses, standard errors for the rest of the table are available on request.

24

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

24

