Tackling climate for real: the role of central banks
Speech given by
Andrew Bailey, Governor of the Bank of England

Reuters Events Responsible Business 2021
Tuesday 1 June 2021

I am grateful to Zane Jamal, Ryan Barrett, Sarah Breeden, Theresa Löber, Matthew Trott, and
Karen Jude for their assistance in helping me prepare these remarks
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

The Bank of England’s mission is to promote the good of the people of the United Kingdom by maintaining
monetary and financial stability. Our understanding of how we can best deliver that stability, and what factors
are relevant to it, evolves with time. This is unsurprising as our economy and financial system are not static,
so neither should be how we go about fulfilling our mission.
The UK economy and financial system have undergone significant transformations in recent decades – as
examples of this, services have risen and manufacturing has declined as a share of output1, debit card
transactions have overtaken cash transactions2, and the share of activity in the financial system accounted
for by non-banks has risen3.

These types of structural shifts have had broad effects, including in our world on the transmission of
monetary policy and the resilience of the financial system. We have taken action in response; for example
after the financial crisis we increased capital requirements for banks so the financial system could act as a
shock absorber rather than amplifier – the benefits of which we have most recently seen in the response to
Covid-19.

Just as we have had to adapt to these changes, to fulfil our mission going forwards we need to look ahead to
the structural shifts we face over the coming years and decades. That will mean hearing central bankers like
me speak about things that we have not in the past – terms like central bank digital currencies, cyber risk,
and climate change are now firmly part of our lexicon.

This is not about us adding new things to our mission, nor is it about doing that which is rightly for others. It is
about taking these new things into account alongside the old as we go about fulfilling our mission, delivering
monetary and financial stability through time.

Climate change

Climate change is an obvious, and indeed urgent, example of this. The physical effects of climate change,
such as rising sea levels and more frequent severe weather events, as well as the transition to a net-zero
economy, through changes in government climate policy, technology and consumer preferences, create
financial risks and economic consequences.

The question is not if but where, to what extent, and how should we respond. Answering all three of those
questions has been at the heart of our work on climate change over the past 6 years. Ignoring them is not an
answer. Indeed the longer we wait, the greater the costs of adjustment.

1

The share of manufacturing output in GDP has fallen from around 17% in 1990 to around 9% more recently, while the share of
services has increased from around 70% to around 81% over the same period. Further details here.
2
See payment volume trends by type in UK Payments Market Report 2020, UK Finance
3
FSB Global Monitoring Report on Non-Bank Financial Intermediation 2020
2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

2

The UK was one of the first countries to embed in legislation a commitment to achieve net-zero greenhouse
gas emissions by 2050.4 Meeting that goal will require an unprecedented structural shift in the economy,
particularly on the supply side. Everything from the way we produce and consume goods and services will
need to change for this economy-wide transition to take place.

The primary levers for driving that transition rest not with central banks, but with governments through setting
climate policy, with industry through innovation and investment, with private finance through allocating
investment, and with consumers through the choices they make. These important and difficult decisions
bring both social and economic consequences.5

Role of central banks

So what then is the role of central banks?
Let me start by emphasising what it is not. We are not here to “solve” climate change or drive the transition.
Those with the mandate and the tools to lead this fight sit elsewhere. But central banks do have a role to
play, and an important one at that.
Our economy and financial system are not immune to planetary-level changes or society’s response to them,
indeed it would be absurd to suggest otherwise. Elon Musk aside - we cannot diversify away from our
exposure to the planet. In that sense climate change is the ultimate systemic risk.
Physical risks can damage property and other infrastructure6, disrupt business supply chains and food
systems, influence productivity and health, and, more broadly, can lead to potentially wide displacement and
even conflict. This can reduce asset values, result in lower profitability for companies, damage public
finances, and increase the cost of settling underwriting losses for insurers.

Transition risks, arising through changes in climate policy, technology and shifting consumer preferences
could prompt a reassessment of the value of a large range of carbon-intensive assets – leaving some
‘stranded’. In turn, this will give rise to credit risk for lenders and market risk for insurers and investors.
Yet these physical and transition risks are not reflected in the market prices of most financial assets.7
Structural barriers such as the lack of climate disclosure, the lack of clear sector-level climate policies, firms
not internalising the cost of emissions, and the short time horizon of some investors, all contribute to what

4

Climate Change Act 2008 (Order 2019)
See Chapter 6 of The Sixth Carbon Budget: The UK’s path to Net-Zero, the Committee on Climate Change
6
As an example of damage exacerbated by climate change - a recent study from Strauss, B.H., Orton, P.M., Bittermann, K. et al. (2021)
estimates that $8.1bn of the $62.7bn of economic damage caused by Hurricane Sandy (New York, 2012) was attributable to climate
change driven rises in sea-levels
7
See Chapter 6 of IMF Global Financial Stability Report 2020
5

3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

3

Nick Stern has described as the greatest market failure the world has ever seen.8 A sharp shift towards a
new equilibrium as a result of recognising the full extent of this market failure could create significant
financial losses in a ‘climate Minsky moment’.

Maintaining monetary and financial stability in light of these risks therefore demands a timely, coherent and
coordinated policy response from the authorities. The importance of the Bank’s role in this has been
recognised through the Chancellor’s recent remit and recommendation letters to the Bank’s policy
committees, which set out that the transition to a net-zero economy is now a part of the government’s
economic strategy that the committees must have regard to.9

So what does this mean a central bank should do in practice?

Financial system

First, and foremost, it means building resiliency at a micro and macro level. We do this by ensuring the
financial system proactively manages and pre-emptively mitigates the financial risks from climate change.
That task falls squarely within the mandate of the Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) and the Financial
Policy Committee (FPC).

The PRA has set supervisory expectations for banks and insurers to ensure they adopt a strategic approach
to climate change and develop capabilities to effectively identify, measure, manage, and where outside
appetite, mitigate the financial risks from climate change. This is a necessary component of protecting the
safety and soundness of PRA-regulated firms.

The FPC, alongside the PRC, will launch next week a Climate change Biennial Exploratory Scenario
exercise – the CBES - to assess the resiliency of individual banks, insurers and the wider financial system to
different climate scenarios. This type of scenario modelling and analysis is critical to enabling real decisions
on climate-related risks by financial firms and policymakers. Assessing resiliency against a range of
scenarios enables us to prepare for what might happen in the absence of certainty about what will happen.

Some have called on us to go further and incentivise change through imposing lower capital requirements for
‘green’ exposures and higher capital requirements for ‘non-green’ or carbon-intensive exposures. As the
prudential regulator, any incorporation of climate change into regulatory capital requirements would need to
be grounded in robust data and be designed to support safety and soundness while avoiding unintended
consequences or compromising our other objectives. In my view, the case for this has yet to be clearly
established and possibly may never be. But our work to improve climate disclosures, scenario analysis, and
risk management, could help unlock such assessments.
8
9

The Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change (2006)
See Government announcement of climate considerations being embedded across UK principal financial regulators
4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

4

Macroeconomy

Beyond the financial system, achieving economy-wide net-zero emissions will require greening the way we
heat our buildings, manufacture industrial goods like steel and cement, generate electricity and produce
food. This could prove to be an opportunity for the economy to regenerate ageing capital and raise
productivity. Analysis done by the Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS) and National Institute
for Economic and Social Research by 2050 suggests that such an orderly transition could lead to some
increase in global GDP, and lower unemployment relative to prior trends. These positive effects should be
larger in countries like the UK that are net importers of energy.

However, as I mentioned earlier, much of that rests on how the transition proceeds. The lesson from
previous episodes of structural change is that they never involve a frictionless re-allocation of capital. And a
disorderly transition, where more severe policies are introduced later in the horizon to compensate, could
result in both lower growth and higher inflation from rising energy and materials costs in the economy.

In either case, the economic impacts from such transition scenarios over the medium term will likely be much
lower than the growing challenges from physical risks. Under current climate policies, which are insufficient
to reach net-zero emissions, analysis from the NGFS scenarios suggest that up to 13% of global GDP would
be at risk by 2050, even before accounting for the potential consequences of severe weather events.

Monetary policy

These risks to the economic outlook make climate change and the transition to a net-zero economy also
relevant factors for the conduct of monetary policy. The typical policy horizon for monetary policy is two to
three years, and so many of the effects of climate change (particularly tipping points) will manifest beyond
that timeframe.

But the effects of climate change matter for monetary policy because structural shifts in the supply side of the
economy can affect not only future point-in-time macroeconomic variables, but also the expected natural rate
of interest (r*) and the natural rate of unemployment (u*).

The physical and transition risks from climate change are relevant to these issues, although the economic
modelling and research to estimate the relative size of these effects has only started to emerge in recent
years. To take one example of the complexities involved in making such an assessment, the natural rate of
interest might face both downward pressure from expectations of severe weather events10 and upwards

10

Dietrich, Müller, and Schoenle (2021) – ‘The Expectations Channel of Climate Change: Implications for Monetary Policy’
5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

5

pressure from demand for investment to replace carbon-intensive capital stock (such as replacing petrol cars
with electric ones).

This dynamic is not unique to climate change. We see it in other structural shifts such as the post financial
crisis trend of weak productivity, and the growth in intangible capital.11

To improve our understanding and better inform future monetary policy, we need more research on this
topic. I am pleased to say that the Bank plans to do more in this space, both in its own capacity and through
working with other central banks and international bodies.

As well as being relevant to the setting of monetary policy, climate change and the transition to net-zero are
also relevant for the implementation of it. The Bank recently became the first central bank to set out a
comprehensive framework for greening a monetary policy asset portfolio - the £20bn stock of sterling
corporate bonds acquired via our Corporate Bond Purchase Scheme (CBPS).12 This will remain a monetary
policy tool, with its overall target stock of assets set by the MPC in order to achieve its primary inflation
objective. However, from Q4 this year we will make adjustments to our approach to the composition of this
portfolio in order to incentivise companies to take actions contributing to an orderly transition to a net–zero
economy. Given the relatively small scale of these holdings - in the context of sterling and global capital
markets - we hope this change will by example influence how larger investors take account of climate risks in
their own asset allocation decisions.
Some may worry this change moves us away from central banks’ core responsibilities, into territory best left
for governments. However, the case for taking this action is clear, it is in line with the change in the MPC’s
remit I described earlier, and far from impeding the effective execution of our policy objectives, it may well
contribute to a future outcome that delivers a more stable monetary and financial system.

Conclusion

I have spoken about the relevance of climate change and the transition to a net-zero economy to central
banks. It is about faithfully executing our mission for monetary and financial stability, taking into account
those structural shifts on the horizon. That brings with it several analytical challenges and demands new
ways of thinking – we welcome this. But it is clear that the biggest component of the journey to net-zero rests
not with central banks, but with government, through the delivery of sector-level climate policy pathways –
without these the real economy cannot adjust effectively. That is one element of uncertainty in climate
change within the gift of governments to solve, and many are working hard to do so.

11

Monetary policy in the intangible economy - speech by Jonathan Haskel, University of Nottingham, February 2020
See ‘It’s not easy being green – but that shouldn’t stop us: how central banks can use their monetary policy portfolios to support
orderly transition to net zero’ speech by Andrew Hauser and ‘Options for greening the Bank of England’s Corporate Bond Purchase
Scheme discussion paper
12

6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

6

I will be speaking later this week at the Green Swan Conference where I will set out in more detail the work
the Bank has done on climate change and where we go from here. As we look ahead to a decade that
climate science tells us must deliver real climate action, I can promise you this, the Bank of England will
continue to play its part.

7

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice

7

