Speech
Telling Tails of oil and global inflation
Technical Appendix to speech given by Martin Weale, Monetary Policy Committee

1

Details of models used

1.1

Estimating the impact of the oil price fall on the UK

The modelling framework used in this section was developed by Harvey (2013) and Creal,
Koopman and Lucas (2012). It is based on the assumption that shocks in the model follow
a t distribution rather than a more conventional Gaussian distribution. The model can then
distinguish between outliers and genuine noise – placing little weight on the former, and
much more on the latter. By looking through random shocks, the model provides a better
picture of the underlying relationship between the variables in the model.
The model itself comprises four variables: the quarterly growth in oil prices; quarterly
GDP growth; quarterly CPI inflation; and the quarter-on-quarter difference in Bank Rate
(in percentage points).
1.2

Measuring the relationship between UK and OECD inflation

An excellent overview of the copula models used in this speech is provided by Patton
(2006) and Fan and Patton (2014).
Chart 6 was constructed using the method described by Patton (2006, p. 909). This
provides a measure of the dependence between the tails of the distributions of UK and
OECD inflation.
The probability plots in Chart 7 were constructed by estimating three different measures of dependence between the UK and OECD core inflation rates. In the first, a Gaussian copula was estimated and the correlation coefficient found to be ρ = 0.47. In (b),
1

a t-distributed copula was estimated, with estimated correlation ρ = 0.49 and ν = 10.0
degrees of freedom. The advantage of the t copula is that one can estimate the degree of
dependence between the tails of the distribution; this is assumed to be the same for the
left-hand and right-hand tails, and in this sample is equal to 0.079. In (c), a SymmetrizedJoe-Clayton copula was estimated. This allows for differing degrees of tail dependence,
and in this sample the difference is large: the dependence of the lower tail – that is, for
low rates of inflation – is 0.012, whilst that of the upper tail – high inflation – it is 0.469.
Chart 8 shows the estimated linear correlation from a t-distributed copula, where the
correlation is allowed to vary over time. The estimate of the correlation is obtained by the
same DCS/GAS framework described above.

2
2.1

Data sources
Estimating the impact of the oil price fall on the UK

The model results presented in Chart 3, and referred to in the text, used quarterly data for
the UK over time sample 1993Q3 to 2014Q4. The oil data were constructed from daily
data from Datastream; GDP and CPI data were from the ONS; and Bank Rate data from
the Bank of England.
2.2

Measuring the relationship between UK and OECD inflation

Monthly data on core and headline inflation were obtained from the OECD Statistics
database. The full sample is from January 1971 to March 2015, unless stated otherwise in the text. The data were seasonally adjusted using the X13 procedure (in Eviews),
and then converted into month-on-month percentage changes. The series for OECD inflation excluding the UK was constructed by subtracting the weighted logarithm of the UK
price level from the logarithm of the whole OECD price level. The weight used was the
average UK share in OECD consumption, which is around 6%.

References
Creal, D., Koopman, S. J. and Lucas, A. (2012) , ‘Generalized autoregressive score models with applications’, Journal of Applied Econometrics

2

Fan, Y. and Patton, A. (2014) ‘Copulas in Econometrics’, Annual Review of Economics,
6, pp. 179-200.
Harvey, A. (2013) Dynamic Models for Volatility and Heavy Tails, Cambridge University
Press
Patton, A. (2013) ’Copula methods for forecasting multivariate time series’, in Handbook
of Economic Forecasting vol. 2B, Elsevier

3

