The supervisory approach of the Prudential Regulation
Authority
Speech given by
Andrew Bailey, Executive Director

At The Queen Elizabeth II Conference Centre, London
19 May 2011

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

Principles of PRA regulation

Can I first of all add my welcome to you all. Regulators are not meant to be popular, even if their events are
well-attended. As Hector has explained, today is the next step towards setting out the future model of
regulation for the PRA. The document you have is the result of a lot of thinking and discussion in the Bank of
England and the FSA over the last nearly twelve months. It is not very long – intentionally so. We would like
it to be read rather than weighed. It is a consultation document, but not in a rigid legal sense. We want to
foster open debate and thereby improve the design of the PRA. Consistent with this objective, we are
issuing the document in advance of the Bill entering Parliament in order to inform debate and scrutiny once
that happens.

My aim today is to provide you with some more detail about our proposed approach to the supervision of
deposit-takers and a small number of larger investment firms. The key feature of the PRA will be its statutory
objective for prudential supervision, which will put a clear emphasis on the promotion of the stability of the
UK financial system, thereby supporting the objectives of the Bank of England generally and its new
Financial Policy Committee in particular. The PRA will support the Bank’s work to build a public consensus
around the need for financial stability as a key objective of public policy, because financial stability is a
precondition for improving public welfare. Our conference today is I hope a step in that process of building
consensus. Later this summer we will spell out our future approach to the prudential regulation of insurers.

Under the so-called twin peaks model of future financial regulation in the UK, and in contrast to the FSA, the
PRA will have a single objective, allowing it to focus fully on promoting the safety and soundness of the firms
it regulates. Key elements in the PRA’s regulatory approach will be to ensure that financial firms do business
in such a way that adverse effects on the UK financial system are avoided and to minimise damage to the
system in the event that a firm does fail. But crucially, as Hector explained, the PRA will not endeavour to
avoid failure of firms within its regulatory remit at all cost.

In a similar vein, the PRA’s regulatory philosophy will be based on the premise that financial firms should be
subject to the disciplines of the market, with regulation and supervision addressing residual market failures.
Through a combination of prudential policy, supervision and work to improve the UK’s resolution
infrastructure, we will seek to ensure that all firms it regulates can fail or be closed in an orderly manner with
minimal impact on the financial system, consistent with the PRA’s objective of promoting financial stability in
the UK.

Maintaining financial stability is an objective in public policy which we should all value highly. We have seen
what happens when we lose it. But achieving and maintaining financial stability does not mean that we have
an industry in which no-one can fail. The costs of attempting to achieve ‘a no-failure’ policy are easy to
identify, not least that we would have an industry in which competition is severely reduced. And a financial

2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

2

services industry in which failure is not possible is unlikely to be able to serve the needs of the economy
effectively.

Risk assessment framework

In order to deliver its objective of stability of the financial system, the PRA will use a new framework to
assess risks to financial stability. Key elements in that risk assessment framework will be: the potential
impact on the financial system of a firm coming under stress or failing; the impact on the viability of a firm’s
business model of the macroeconomic and business risk context; and a firm’s overall safety and soundness,
which may act to mitigate the potential risk a firm poses to financial stability. Key mitigants to be assessed
by the PRA will be: the degree of resolvability of a firm (working closely with the Bank’s Special Resolution
Unit); its financial strength (including its ability to generate capital through earnings, its capital held against
future risks, the quality of its liquid assets and its liquidity management); and the quality of a firm’s risk
management and governance (including the competence of its senior management).

This new risk assessment framework will replace the FSA’s ARROW approach and seek to integrate the
entire range of the PRA’s supervisory activities. Risks to a firm will be identified using: baseline monitoring;
investigation and assurance; and the macroeconomic and business context. Drawing on PRA and Bank
expertise, that will result in a risk assessment for the firm, which can then form the basis for a supervisory
strategy (with appropriate mitigating actions) for the firm.

Our approach to risk assessment will be proportionate. This is a very important point in the new approach.
Business model and resolvability analysis as well as stress tests for small firms (such as credit unions) will
be largely based on simple macroeconomic and sectoral risk profiling. But the PRA will have to undertake a
more intensive and idiosyncratic analysis of the business models of and potential stresses for large
institutions.

Overall, the PRA’s risk assessment framework will make increased use of forward-looking analysis to, on the
basis of a balance of risks, assess the likelihood of firm failure, drawing on the Bank’s and FPC’s analysis of
systemic risk.

Judgement-based supervision

The PRA will take a forward-looking and judgment-based approach to supervision. As Hector outlined
earlier, baseline monitoring will be undertaken for all firms, including those that can be resolved with minimal
disruption to the financial system (e.g. credit unions and small deposit-takers). This monitoring will include a
review of a firm’s resolvability (at least) once a year, analysis of a firm’s financial position, discussions with
senior management and ensuring compliance with minimum prudential standards for capital, liquidity and

3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

3

large exposures, as well as early interventions (where necessary) driven by a new Proactive Intervention
Framework (PIF). I will come back to this framework later.

Beyond such baseline monitoring, PRA resources will be focused on those firms and prudential issues that
have the greatest impact on the stability of the UK financial system. Importantly, forward-looking supervision
will involve aiming to ensure not only that firms are compliant with prudential rules today, but also assessing
whether firms are likely to be financially sound in various future states of the world.

Peer analysis will play an important role in the assessment of a firm’s business risk, both to detect whether a
firm is an outlier relative to its peers and to understand sectoral risks that may threaten financial stability and
thus require action by the FPC. We will use forward-looking stress tests to assess the balance of risks
surrounding a firm’s financial strength (including quantity and quality of capital and liquidity, risk
concentrations, and firms’ recovery plans). The focus will be on bottom-up stress tests of individual banks,
but the PRA will also assist in sector-wide exercises, working with the Bank to support the FPC or supranational authorities such as the EBA or IMF. The PRA and Bank will be active in this field, as we are today,
but not in the over-simplified world of pass and fail. We use stress tests, and will develop our use of them,
as diagnostic tools to examine the potential impact of different developments, acknowledging that looking
into the future is inherently uncertain.

To support the PRA’s objective of creating a regime in which firms can be resolved in an orderly way (i.e. a
non-zero failure regime), analysis of a firm’s resolvability and the development of credible and effective
resolution plans are key parts of the PRA’s supervisory assessment. Among other factors, the PRA will, in
conjunction with the Bank’s Special Resolution Unit, analyse the impact of the resolution plan on the financial
system, in particular whether critical economic functions such as the payments system are adequately
protected. At a minimum, firms will need to demonstrate that they can produce a single view of depositors’
funds to enable the FSCS to pay out insured depositors quickly, to reduce the impact on financial stability.
And by quickly, I mean the seven day payout target that we have set. I firmly believe that rapid payout, and
the promise of it on a credible basis, is important to maintain the public’s confidence in their banks.

Supervisory interventions and actions expected of firms

We will be introducing a new framework for proactive intervention in the PRA with a set of stages, or triggers,
that represent points at which regulatory intervention would be required. This is in part in order to formalise
resolution arrangements but also to mitigate against the risk of regulatory forbearance. This is not intended
to detract from the judgement-based supervisory approach that will be at the core of the PRA philosophy:
supervisors will of course need to use their judgement within the formal Intervention Framework.

Guided by the Intervention Framework, the PRA’s supervisory interventions will be aimed at reducing the
major risks to the stability of the financial system. The framework will set out both actions expected to be
4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

4

taken by a firm as its financial position deteriorates as well as the authorities’ actions to prepare for orderly
failure or resolution of a firm. In line with our forward-looking approach to supervision, the assessment of a
firm’s position in the PIF will be based on the firm’s viability in both current and future states of the world, and
be undertaken as part of the ongoing supervisory process. That position will be communicated to the firm
and reviewed in response to specific concerns arising in a firm’s external operating environment, such as the
build-up of sectoral risks identified by the FPC. As a firm moves from stage 1 (involving a normal level of
supervisory monitoring) to later stages of the five stage PIF, supervisory monitoring and actions will become
more intrusive, and contingency planning with the Bank’s SRU and the FSCS will take on greater
importance.

The PRA will adopt a high threshold of materiality when mitigating actions are raised with firms. Such
actions will be closely linked to the PRA’s assessment of risks and focused on the stability of the UK financial
system. Actions will be communicated clearly and at senior level to the firm, with an expectation that the firm
will respond appropriately. Hector and I will be closely involved in giving these messages, with our
supervisory teams.

In cases where a firm’s viability is under threat, the PRA will take supervisory action at an early stage to
reduce the probability of disorderly failure. So the focus will be on ensuring that a firm’s resolution plan is
credible, which will require the PRA to work closely with the firm in question and the SRU at the Bank and
the FSCS. And in order to reduce the likelihood of firm failure the PRA may require a firm to change its
business model or hold greater capital buffers, especially for systemically important firms. Because the PRA
will in general aim to pre-empt risks before they materialise, enforcement actions are likely to be rare. And to
make failure capable of being resolved, the organisation of firms might need to change.

Delivery of supervision

In order to deliver its new approach to supervision, the PRA will be staffed by highly qualified teams with
strong analytical skills and experience in supervision. Naturally, the scale and depth of the resources
required for effective supervision will vary according to a firm’s business model and complexity.

Major supervisory judgements will be subject to rigorous review, involving the PRA’s most senior
management. For the systemically most important firms there will be regular contact with PRA senior
management. Constructive engagement and corrective action undertaken by regulated firms may, in some
states of the world, act as a substitute for additional capital requirements imposed by supervisors.

To support the objective of preserving financial stability, we will enhance the role of third parties. Auditors
will play an important role in this respect, because they can identify and alert the regulator to potential
weaknesses in a firm’s controls and the quality of financial data, which underpin the information used to
supervise firms. The PRA will maintain regular dialogue with a firm’s auditors about current and future risks
5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

5

to the firm, to improve both audit effectiveness and prudential supervision. There will also be active
engagement with a firm’s audit committee and non-executive directors to monitor mitigation of key risks to a
firm.

To allow the PRA to form an independent judgement of the key risks to financial stability, it will need to have
access to accurate information from firms. Regulatory data submitted to the PRA should be of high quality,
as they will form the basis of the PRA’s supervisory approach and will be a key input to analysis for the FPC.
We will maintain an effective data quality assurance process, and at times involve third parties to verify a
firm’s regulatory returns and resolution plans. These are changes from the past. The PRA will review its
regulatory data collection periodically, so that the data collected are used in support of supervisory
judgements, while at the same time ensuring compliance with regulatory reporting standards set by the
European Supervisory Authorities. The PRA does not want to collect unnecessary information.

We recognise that management, shareholders, creditors and auditors all play an important role in managing
prudential risk and will therefore look to the market as a source of discipline to promote prudent behaviour.
One of the PRA’s goals will be to ensure the market is able to assess safety and soundness of a firm,
through greater comparability of disclosures across firms and through time, including a comprehensive
disclosure of risks. As part of this commitment to encourage more market discipline, the PRA will seek to
publish some regulatory returns, though it will not go so far as to disclose its own supervisory judgements
about firms.

PRA policy making

The PRA’s approach to prudential regulation will be to set out a high-level framework containing minimum
standards expected of firms. The prudential policy framework will aim to protect against a range of possible
outcomes and support judgement-based supervision, with policies covering areas such as capital and
liquidity adequacy, large exposures, risk management, resolvability and remuneration. PRA policies will
incorporate FPC recommendations, to ensure consistency between micro and macro-prudential policy. The
PRA’s policies and rules will, as much as possible, be clear and contain explanations of their purpose. In
turn, the PRA will expect firms to consider the purpose and spirit of PRA rules when managing their business
and to avoid creative compliance and regulatory arbitrage designed to mask the riskiness of their activities or
financial exposures.

The PRA will adopt a proactive and constructive approach to influencing the international debate about
regulatory standards. It will seek to ensure that its judgement-based approach is not undermined by
international developments, working closely with HMT, the rest of the Bank of England and the FCA to
develop a consistent UK negotiating position on financial regulation. The PRA will focus on active and early
engagement with European authorities such as the EBA and EIOPA, as well as the Financial Stability Board
and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, at senior level. Increasingly, the rules of financial
6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

6

regulation are set on an international basis, but that should not be taken to mean that the necessary
judgements we have to make when applying those rules on a forward-looking basis are constrained.

Coordination with other authorities

Domestic

Effective coordination with the FCA will be critical to the successful delivery of the PRA’s new supervisory
framework. The PRA and FCA will need to establish supervisory colleges and MoUs to ensure information
relevant to both organisations will be shared. We and the formative FCA recognise the importance of
effective co-ordination in practice – both to achieve our objectives and in recognition of the importance of
operating efficiently and not burdening the regulated community. I expect that we and the FCA will publish
details of our proposals on how we propose to handle this co-ordination in practice.

But micro-prudential supervision and coordination between the twin peaks regulators is not sufficient to
deliver financial stability and must be complemented by effective macro-prudential oversight. As a subsidiary
of the Bank of England, there will also be close cooperation and information exchange between the PRA and
rest of the Bank including the FPC. Firm-specific information provided by the PRA will feed into the FPC’s
macro-prudential assessment; and FPC analysis of potential systemic risks will help inform the PRA’s
judgements on specific types of institutions and sectors. The FPC will also give recommendations and
directions to the PRA and FCA on regulatory tools to be used to support macro-prudential policy, and the
PRA will be responsible for implementing those, just as it will be for authorisation of firms it regulates and the
judgements that key individuals are fit and proper.

The PRA’s functions will differ markedly from those of the FCA and the FSCS. It will not be responsible for
consumer protection, for ensuring market integrity or for preventing financial crime or money laundering –
those distinctions must be clear. It will seek to mitigate the disruption to the functioning of the economy from
the failure of a firm it regulates, but that will not extend to preventing direct losses to depositors: the FSCS
exists to provide protection as a last resort.

International

As noted in the document we published this morning, the PRA will aim to apply the same prudential
requirements to all banks, including those from overseas. And given the PRA’s statutory objective to
contribute to financial stability, supervisory efforts will focus on large international banks. In the case of UK
subsidiaries of overseas banks, links of the UK entity with the group as a whole as well as the group’s
viability need to be an integral part of the PRA’s supervisory assessment. And to ensure orderly resolvability
of such subsidiaries, the PRA will engage closely with overseas supervisors, via colleges and cross-border
coordination of recovery and resolution plans.
7

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

7

The PRA will have only limited powers (and limited access to group-wide information) over branches of EEA
banks. Given the importance of these branches in the UK, the PRA will seek to influence the group-level
supervisory approach of the home state regulator in cases where the bank group poses a risk to UK financial
stability. A key priority will be to ensure that home regulators have realistic plans to resolve such groups
without adversely affecting the stability of the UK financial system. This is a key missing element of the socalled European Passporting System. Moreover, it is essential that international co-operation among
regulators is real and effective. The PRA as a home regulator will need to give as much information as it will
want to receive as a host regulator.

The PRA will also use the establishment of the European Supervisory Authorities as an opportunity to
influence the supervision of EEA branches, through active participation in supervisory colleges and in the
European Banking Authority, as well as peer reviews of other countries’ supervisory approaches.

In conclusion, you may well ask why we think we can produce an approach that “gets it right” this time. I
think the key element of the new approach is the clarity that should come from the single objective of
maintaining financial stability. The Twin Peaks model helps in this respect because it provides greater focus
for the regulator on each peak. Of course, now we have to put the new approach into effect, so our job is far
from done.

Thank you.

8

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

8

