Bank of England

Page 1

The path to 2 per cent−
speech by Silvana Tenreyro
Given at Society of Professional Economists Annual Conference
London
11 November 2022

Bank of England

Page 2

Speech
These are extremely challenging times for the global economy, and the UK economy in
particular. We have been going through a period of extraordinary volatility in financial
markets, and in the outlook for the UK economy. And this has come on the back of a
period of successive, enormous shocks, starting with the Covid pandemic, and now
dominated by energy prices.
In the face of such extraordinary events, one might expect an extraordinary response. But
today I want to argue that while monetary policy will need to take into account all of the
effects of these large economic shocks, and the responses to them of fiscal policy and
financial markets, we should do so in a thoroughly ordinary way. As always, we should be
guided by our remit. We need to bring inflation back to the 2% target sustainably.
This resolute focus on the inflation target is the key thing I would like to stress today. The
goal of monetary policy is not to offset in their entirety movements in energy prices, nor
changes in the exchange rate, gilt yields or mortgage rates. While all affect the economy,
we do not target any of them directly. Sometimes their movements will reflect market
volatility, and sometimes they will reflect more persistent, real adjustments. It is not within
the power of monetary policy to prevent those adjustments from taking place.
We need instead to calibrate our response through the lens of our remit. What is the
impact on demand? On supply? And on inflation? And that will tell us where interest rates
need to go. Different MPC members will make different assessments of those impacts.
They may therefore also come to different policy decisions. This was the case in
November, when I voted for a smaller increase in Bank Rate than the rest of the
committee. But we are all agreed on where we are heading: on the path back sustainably
to our 2% inflation target.
I will emphasise three points:






Energy price increases push up inflation in the near term. But in the medium term,
they have disinflationary effects through lower real incomes, lower demand and
higher unemployment. These need to be balanced against any second-round
effects that could slow the fall in inflation.
Following shocks, monetary policy will return inflation to the 2% target. When
shocks cause movements in asset prices such as gilt yields or the exchange rate,
policy need only offset the effect on inflation, not prevent those movements entirely.
Monetary policy has tightened significantly this year, but most of its effects on
demand have yet to occur. Too high a path for Bank Rate therefore risks
oversteering inflation below target in the medium term.

Bank of England

Page 3

1. The shock: energy prices
The main driver of high inflation this year has been an extraordinary increase in global
energy prices. As Chart 1 shows, a large part of the above-target inflation in the UK right
now is accounted for by the direct mechanical effect of high energy prices on consumer
prices. And a further share comes from indirect effects, since energy is an important input
in the production of many goods and services.1

Chart 1: Energy prices have been the main driver of above-target inflation
Contributions to difference in CPI inflation versus 2012-19 average (a)
Percentage points

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, ONS and Bank
calculations.
(a) Data to September 2022. Bank staff projection from October 2022 to December 2022. Fuels and
lubricants estimates use Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy petrol price data for
October 2022 and then are based on the sterling oil futures curve.

The appropriate monetary policy response to energy shocks is not automatic. Increases in
energy prices have several different effects, which can push inflation in different directions.
Figure 1 illustrates these channels. Their effects operate at different horizons, which is
important, since the main impacts of monetary policy come after a lag, so we need to be
able to account for the relative strength of these channels in the future. And that relative
strength will depend on the size and nature of the energy price shock, as well as on
broader economic circumstances. Those include the backdrop in the labour market, the
1

Another substantial share, including the initial pick-up in inflation, can largely be accounted for by the large
increase in globally traded goods prices, captured in core goods. This has been related to both the
reopening from the pandemic, and the large fiscal stimulus in many countries, particularly the US. See
Tenreyro (2021) for a discussion.

Bank of England

Page 4

response of fiscal policy, and any responses in financial markets. Each quarter the MPC
uses its forecasts to assess the balance of these different effects, so it can set monetary
policy to bring inflation sustainably to 2% in the medium term.

Figure 1: Stylised transmission of an energy price shock to UK inflation

The first, direct effect, of energy-price increases is straightforward. Energy prices are
determined on globally traded markets. These wholesale energy prices are passed on
directly to petrol prices paid by consumers, as well as to the prices charged on household
gas and electricity bills.2 When these rise, they directly push up on UK consumer price
inflation. Energy only makes up 7% of the CPI basket.3 But because energy prices have
been increasing around 60% over a 12 month period, they directly contribute about
4 percentage points to the sharp increase in UK inflation (Chart 1).4
The second channel is indirect supply-chain effects through firms’ input costs. The
production of many goods, but also of some services (e.g. transport services or
restaurants) require a substantial amount of energy. And even for firms where energy
makes up only a small share of their total costs, such a huge increase in energy prices can
still lead to a material cost increase. Firms also use intermediate inputs in production, the
prices of which may also have increased owing to rising energy prices. In 2019, energy
accounted for 2.3% of the input costs for the firms that produce non-energy goods and
services in the CPI basket.

The speed of this pass-through will depend on the OFGEM cap, and on the details of the government’s
Energy Price Guarantee (EPG).
3 Of which 3.6% is electricity, gas and other fuels, with the rest being largely petrol.
4 The energy-price change varies from month to month, and was 50% in September, but was expected by to
have increased to nearly 60% in October.
2

Bank of England

Page 5

These indirect effects from firms’ input prices are always an important part of the
transmission of energy-price movements. But pass-through this time may have been
amplified by the sheer size of the shock, which is likely to have limited firms’ ability to
absorb such large cost increases via lower profit margins. Bank staff estimates suggest
that around ¾ of a percentage point of current CPI inflation from other categories of goods
and services comes from the indirect effects of higher energy prices.
What do these direct and indirect effects imply for monetary policy? The key observation is
that the main effects of monetary policy come through with some delay. Estimates of the
speed of policy transmission vary, but typically suggest that the largest impact of policy on
inflation comes somewhere beyond the first year.5 That makes responding to these
short-lived price-level impacts counterproductive, since they drop out of the annual
inflation calculation by the time the policy impact is at its peak. Trying to offset them would
be liable to cause more inflation volatility rather than less, making it more difficult to meet
the inflation target in the medium term.6
Instead, my policy decisions have focused on the final two channels in Figure 1 – inertia,
or second-round effects, and lower real incomes. These capture the potential effects of the
energy price shock on medium-term inflation. They push the appropriate policy response
in opposite directions, so assessing both the size and even the direction of the appropriate
policy response depends on quantifying each channel.
So-called “second-round effects” refer to a variety of mechanisms that lead to inertia from
domestic wage and price setting, which, if persistent enough, could push up on inflation
into the medium term. These are typically a product of various rigidities in real wages,
profit margins and relative wages and prices. Similar channels could arise from increases
in short-term inflation expectations, although survey measures of these are closely
correlated with actual inflation. This makes it difficult to identify any independent influence
of forward-looking short-term expectations, over and above backward-looking inertia.7
To explain where this inertia comes from, note that the energy-price shock has worsened
the UK’s terms of trade, making the country poorer. To the extent higher energy prices
persist, the loss in national real income must ultimately be absorbed via some combination
of lower real wages and lower profits for the economy overall. If every worker and firm’s

5

See Tenreyro (2022) for a discussion.
The arguments would be different if movements in energy prices were known in advance. But energy-price
shocks are almost never forecastable, let alone when they are driven by an unexpected war. Even
hypothetically, if we had known in advance, offsetting all of the current shocks on inflation would have
required us to increase interest-rates and unemployment to double-digit rates at the height of the pandemic,
all while the global policy effort was focused on trying to protect jobs and avoid unnecessary business
closures.
7 It is also possible that after a long period away from target, medium-term inflation expectations could drift
away from those consistent with 2%. I judge that these expectations are well anchored, and by bringing
inflation back to target in the medium term, the MPC can ensure they remain so.
6

Bank of England

Page 6

real wages and profits fully adjusted to the energy price shock instantly, then there would
be no further inflationary impact after the direct and indirect effects dropped out.
The second round effects arise because in reality, some firms or workers will receive
higher nominal revenues or incomes, rather than adjusting downwards. For example,
some price contracts are indexed to CPI or RPI inflation; some firms have offered higher
than usual pay increases, or additional pay rounds, to help with higher energy costs; and
more generally measured inflation is often used as a reference point in salary negotiations.
If these increases are not offset by even larger real wage or price declines elsewhere, then
in aggregate we see real wage or real profit resistance, which will slow the speed with
which wages and domestically driven prices fall back to target-consistent levels.8
Second-round impacts on domestic wage and price setting need to be balanced against
the disinflationary effect of lower real incomes, the final channel in Figure 1. In the UK,
the evidence suggests that large or persistent increases in energy prices should lead to
large falls in demand relative to supply, resulting in higher unemployment and downward
pressure on real wages, ultimately weighing on inflation in the medium-term.9 For a net
energy importer like the UK, the fall in real incomes is simply a reflection of the
deterioration in our terms of trade.
Demand is likely to fall even if energy prices fall back, albeit by less than if they stay high
persistently. This is what happens in the MPC’s November MPR forecast, which is
conditioned on the fall in energy prices implied by futures markets. If increases in energy
prices are temporary, or people expect them to be so, they may seek to smooth their
consumption by borrowing more, or reducing savings. In basic representative agent
models, there is little effect on consumption of temporary falls in real income for this
reason. But in reality, a significant share of households are credit constrained, or consume
partly or fully out of current income. This means that a temporary fall in real incomes can
still lead to a material fall in consumption. A recent paper by Bank colleagues (Chan, Diz
and Kanngiesser, 2022) shows how in a (TANK) model with heterogeneous agents, such
a channel leads to a larger drop in consumption and a less inflationary shock (Chart 2).10

Blanchard and Galí (2007), ‘Real Wage Rigidities and the New Keynesian Model’ show that in the
presence of real wage rigidities an energy price shock works much like a trade-off inducing cost-push shock.
9 See Harrison, Thomas and de Weymarn (2011), ‘The impact of permanent energy price shocks on the
UK economy’ for a full discussion of this channel in response to a permanent energy-price shock.
10 Chan, Diz and Kanngiesser (2022), ‘Energy Prices and Household Heterogeneity: Monetary Policy in
a Gas-TANK’
8

Bank of England

Page 7

Chart 2: Model responses to an energy-price shock
Impulse response functions from Chan, Diz and Kanngiesser (2022) (a)

Consumption

CPI inflation

Quarters

0

4

8

0

Quarters

12 16 20

0
0

4

8

-1

TANK

4

8 12 16 20

3.5

3

3
3

2.5

-1.5

0

RANK
-0.5

-1

Quarters

12 16 20

3.5

RANK
-0.5

Nominal policy rate

2.5

RANK

2.75

3

2.75

2.5

2.5

TANK
2

2

2.25

2.25

TANK
-1.5 1.5
Percentage deviation
from steady state

1.5
Annualised percentage
points

2

2
Annualised percentage
points

Source: Chan, Diz and Kanngiesser (2022).
(a) Cyan lines show responses in a Representative Agent New Keynesian (RANK) model where the
representative household faces no borrowing constraints. Orange lines show responses in a Two-Agent New
Keynesian (TANK) model where one type of household is credit-constrained. The nominal policy rate in the
model is set using a Taylor rule.

The appropriate policy response to the energy shock has hinged on the balance of these
two offsetting effects on medium-term inflation. The channel from lower real incomes to
demand is larger in net energy importers like the UK than in the US.11 It also depends on
households’ ability or willingness to maintain consumption and therefore demand by
cutting back on energy and energy-intensive goods and services – their elasticity of
substitution. If this is small, then the impact on demand is likely to be larger.
The strength of inertia in domestic wage and price setting will depend to a large degree on
the energy shock itself. The larger and more persistent the increase in energy prices, the
bigger are likely to be the second-round effects. Over the decades, structural changes to
the UK economy have reduced the typical scale of second-round effects, for a given
increase in inflation. But as the energy-price shock has built over the past year, so too has
the likely scale of any inertia. Partly as a result, I have judged that some policy tightening
has been required.
Higher interest rates cannot necessarily prevent second-round effects from occurring.
Some, for example from types of indexation, are a mechanical consequence of the large
11

The channel can still be present in net exporters too, for example if it redistributes incomes away from
households with higher marginal propensities to consume. The US has also been much less exposed to the
fluctuations in energy prices related to the Russian invasion of Ukraine.

Bank of England

Page 8

direct and indirect effects of higher energy prices.12 However tighter monetary policy can
lean against their impact on inflation. By weakening demand and increasing the amount of
slack, policy can help push down on domestic wage and price pressures where those
wages and prices are not indexed, counterbalancing the inertia that resulted from the
energy price shock.
It is also possible that some second-round effects interact with the state of the labour
market.13 For example, perhaps some workers in a tight labour market can push for wage
rises in line with inflation when it is easier to find an alternative job.14 If so, the ultimate
impact of any energy-price increase also depends on conditions in the labour market.

2. The backdrop: the labour market
A key backdrop for our response to the energy price shock is that the UK labour market
tightened considerably as the economy emerged from the pandemic, and remains tight in
absolute terms. The unemployment rate fell to 3.5% in the three months to August, its
lowest level since 1974 (Chart 3). The number of unemployed people has fallen below its
pre-Covid level, and there continue to be more vacancies than there are unemployed.

12

There is also evidence that the inflation perceptions of some households and firms are particularly
influenced by highly visible prices, such as energy and food, rather than the aggregate inflation rate. See
Tenreyro (2019) for a discussion. Since monetary policy has only a very limited effect on these prices, it is
unlikely to be able to prevent second-round effects coming from the impact of energy and food prices.
13 See Pill (2022).
14 It is not an objective of monetary policymakers to decide how real income gains or losses are distributed.
Taking as given those distributional decisions between workers and firms, monetary policymakers need to
set interest rates to ensure inflation comes back to target.

Bank of England

Page 9

Chart 3: Unemployment has fallen and inactivity has increased
Unemployment rate and inactivity rate for those aged 16 and over

Sources: ONS.

One factor behind the labour market tightening is the marked increase in the number of
inactive people – those without a job and not actively seeking one. The UK stands out
among most other developed economies in this respect. While the inactivity rate has fallen
below its 2019 average in the median OECD country, in the UK inactivity remains above
its level in 2019.15 As much as three quarters of the increase in labour market tightness
relative to pre-Covid can be accounted for by this rise in inactivity, which has been
concentrated among people aged 50 to 64. Recent work by my colleague Jonathan Haskel
suggests that it has been partly driven by an increase in long-term sickness.16
The tight labour market is one reason for high rates of pay growth. Private sector regular
pay accelerated over 2022, with annual growth at 6.2% in the three months to August, well
above target-consistent levels. Although real wages are still falling, it is likely that some of
the increase in nominal wages also reflects second-round effects stemming from high
headline inflation. For example, contacts of the Bank’s Agents note that in addition to the
tight labour market, inflation is increasingly a significant driver of pay awards. It is also
possible that second-round effects are larger than otherwise because of a tight labour
15

See Haskel (2022).
Haskel and Martin (2022), ‘Economic inactivity and the labour market experience of the long-term
sick’.
16

Bank of England

Page 10

market. But it is difficult to disentangle these different drivers quantitatively – a tight labour
market; second-round effects; or interactions between the two.

Chart 4: Vacancies and employment indicators starting to weaken
Indicators of vacancies and employment (a)

Sources: KPMG/REC UK Report on Jobs, S&P Global/CIPS, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) KPMG/REC series is the total vacancies index. ONS vacancy survey shows three-month averages.

How quickly wage growth falls back will depend both on the size of second-round effects,
and on how quickly the labour market loosens. The labour market typically responds with
some lag to changes in demand, so it is likely to be too early to see any effect of the
downturn on unemployment. But in response to the recent and prospective falls in
spending, there are now initial signs that the labour market is starting to loosen. A growing
number of contacts of the Bank’s Agents report pausing recruitment, for example. There
are also firmer signs of a weakening in vacancies and employment survey indicators
(Chart 4).

3. The response: fiscal policy
The impacts of the energy shock around the world have also led to large fiscal-policy
responses. No policy can prevent sharply higher energy prices making energy importers,
such as the UK, poorer. This is the unavoidable consequence of an increase in the price of
the goods we import relative to those we produce. But policy can seek to smooth that
impact over time, as well as to influence how the burden is distributed across the
economy. Fiscal policy is the appropriate tool to do this: it can be more targeted than

Bank of England

Page 11

monetary policy; and crucially for distributional decisions, it is carried out by representative
governments.17
For monetary policy, the question, as always, is how much Bank Rate needs to respond to
fiscal policy to ensure inflation remains on a path to 2% in the medium term. Normally, this
would be relatively straightforward: fiscal policy is a textbook demand shock, and we
understand well the plausible range of its effects on output and inflation. But the answer
now is more complicated than usual, given the different nature of the UK Energy Price
Guarantee (EPG) – and similar support schemes abroad – relative to typical fiscal news.
Adding to this, in the UK there has been unusually high uncertainty in recent months about
the overall fiscal stance. This has been both in light of and reflected in extreme volatility in
markets. I will now discuss each of these complications in turn.
First, the EPG will have two-sided impacts on inflationary pressures, unlike standard tax
cuts and spending increases. In the medium-term, the EPG offsets part of the
energy-driven reduction in demand, by limiting the fall in real incomes. In that aspect it
behaves in a similar way to an automatic stabiliser, mitigating disinflationary pressures.
But in the near-term, as a price freeze, it also limits the peak in measured CPI inflation. We
now expect this to rise to around 11% in Q4, compared to 13% in our August forecast.
By smoothing through the near-term peak in measured inflation, the EPG reduces the
likely size of any second-round effects from headline inflation to domestic wages and
prices.18 This is true even though the UK as a whole is still paying the same for energy.
That is because much explicit and implicit price and wage indexation in the economy
depends on measured inflation rates, even if they do not capture the true economic cost
for the whole economy.
As with energy price changes, monetary policymakers must judge which of these two
effects is likely to have a larger impact on medium-term inflation. For my own part, my
votes as energy prices increased have put weight on the impact from high near-term
headline inflation on inertia. By partially offsetting these, the EPG allows us to focus more
on the balance of demand and supply in the medium term.
Second, there has been far more volatility and uncertainty than usual around the overall
fiscal stance. This has led to changes in my assessment of the appropriate setting of
monetary policy, as the fiscal outlook has altered. At our September MPC meeting, it
looked likely that there would be a significant fiscal loosening in the forthcoming

17

The persistence of the energy-price shock will determine the extent to which the government can smooth
its impact over time.
18 Whether those additional second-round effects are avoided entirely, or simply postponed until headline
inflation is weaker, will depend on the path for energy prices after the EPG closes, on the process through
which high headline inflation causes inertia, and ultimately, on monetary policy.

Bank of England

Page 12

Growth Plan. Given subsequent developments, it is now likely that the stance of fiscal
policy will be tighter than I had previously assumed.
Third, monetary policy also has to consider the appropriate response to the extreme
market volatility that took place around fiscal developments in recent weeks. While
triggered by a fiscal event, this has clearly reflected changes in risk premia in UK assets,
over and above the usual expected monetary response to changes in fiscal policy.
Supporting this interpretation, sterling and long-term interest rates moved in opposite
directions. If the cause were instead monetary-policy expectations, the currency would
tend to appreciate as rate expectations increased. Moreover, using standard fiscal
multipliers, it would be hard to explain such a large movement in yields, especially as
some of the plans were known in advance.
There have been many potential explanations expounded for why the risk premium on UK
assets moved around so much over the past weeks. From my perspective, the precise
source of these market moves is not of great importance. Whatever the cause, we can
observe the moves in financial markets, and work out how they impact our forecasts for
demand, supply and inflation. Those forecasts can then inform our policy decisions, as
they did following the recent episode.

4. The response: financial markets
Volatility in UK financial markets over September and October was evident across different
asset classes, but was particularly marked in pricing of sterling, and of UK government
debt. Although risk premia have been an obvious UK specific driver, the moves also came
in the context of increased volatility in global financial markets.

Bank of England

Page 13

Chart 5: UK government bond yields rose sharply relative to others
Ten-year nominal government bond yields (a)

Sources: Refinitiv Eikon from LSEG and Bank calculations.
(a) Data to 9 November 2022.

The interest rate on 10 year UK government debt (gilts) increased by over 1 percentage
point between September 22 and September 27 (Chart 5). Over subsequent weeks, it has
retraced those moves entirely – falling back first after the Bank of England’s intervention19,
and then further in response to political developments and announcements about changes
in fiscal plans. Similar movements were evident in shorter maturity interest rates most
relevant for UK household lending, while there was even more extreme volatility in
longer-dated bonds, where liquidity issues were most acute. At the same time, the sterling
ERI fell by 2.5% in a day on September 23, but despite a volatile period, had more than
recovered by our November MPC meeting, and is now at around its pre-fall level (Chart
6).

See Breeden (2022) and Hauser (2022) for discussions of the Bank’s intervention and the threat to
financial stability that motivated it.
19

Bank of England

Page 14

Chart 6: Sterling fell sharply in September, but has since recovered
Sterling effective exchange rate index (ERI) and selected bilateral exchange rates (a)

Sources: Refinitiv Eikon from LSEG and Bank calculations.
(a) Data to 9 November 2022.

When considering how to respond to financial market moves, the MPC takes the actions
necessary to return inflation sustainably to target. As an inflation-targeting central bank, we
need respond only to the extent that they affect the inflation outlook. Neither gilt yields nor
sterling are intermediate targets. Both impact inflation, but not identically to how monetary
policy does. If we were to try to use monetary policy to implicitly target financial-market
variables, that would therefore be at the expense of our inflation target, not in support of it.
So how should monetary policy respond to an increase in the risk premium, were it to
re-emerge? Monetary policy can do little about the risk premium itself. What we can do is
set Bank Rate in a way that offsets its various impacts on inflation.
Taking each variable in turn, a higher risk premium on UK government debt increases
longer-term government yields. These are mirrored in higher yields on UK corporate debt
and reference rates for bank lending. These feed through to a higher price and lower
availability of credit, as we saw in October. This tightening in credit conditions weighs on
demand more than supply, reducing inflationary pressures. Such developments, all else
equal, typically require looser policy than otherwise to leave inflation unchanged.
In contrast, a fall in sterling due to a higher risk premium pushes up on import prices, as
well as providing a boost to demand from higher net exports. Both effects push up on
inflation, so they require tighter policy than otherwise. But that does not imply aiming to

Bank of England

Page 15

restore the previous (or indeed any specific) level of sterling. If sterling assets are riskier,
the exchange rate needs to adjust, and the role of the MPC is to manage that adjustment
in a way that ensures 2% inflation, not to try to prevent it.
The same point applies to the recent strength in the dollar against sterling and most other
currencies. One major reason for relative dollar strength is that the UK terms of trade – the
prices of the goods and services we export relative to those we import – have worsened
against the US, mainly because the US has not experienced as large an increase in
energy costs (Chart 7). A worsening UK terms of trade implies the UK real exchange-rate
must depreciate. This will happen via some combination of a nominal exchange-rate
depreciation, which will increase import prices; or via a recession, which will generate the
real depreciation by reducing domestic inflationary pressures.

Chart 7: The UK terms of trade have worsened against the US
Terms of trade

Sources: US Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat, ONS, Refinitiv Eikon from LSEG and Bank calculations.

Avoiding any import-price increase, and forcing the entire adjustment to come through
domestic prices, would be inconsistent with the inflation target. So a nominal depreciation
of the currency is likely to form an inevitable part of the adjustment. Historical experience
in the UK also points towards the dangers of trying to avoid an exchange-rate adjustment
by following interest rates abroad, when economic trajectories are markedly different. At
the same time, the other extreme, of ignoring import-price inflation entirely, would push
inflation above target. To meet the CPI inflation target involves somewhere between the
extremes: some import-price inflation, counterbalanced by weaker domestic activity and
lower domestic inflation.

Bank of England

Page 16

Rather than trying to offset movements in specific financial-market variables, inflation
targeting involves aggregating them together to quantify their impact on the inflation
outlook. One way of doing this is to look at financial conditions indices. These suggest that
financial conditions have tightened considerably since our August forecast.
In our November forecast round, the MPC weighed these changes in financial conditions
alongside other new developments, including in energy prices, the labour market and fiscal
policy. That assessment then informs our current policy decisions, as well as any guidance
over the path we anticipate will be needed for policy rates in future.

5. The response: tighter monetary policy
In response to the shocks seen over the past year, and taking into account the fiscal and
financial market responses, the MPC has responded by tightening policy. We have judged
that without increasing Bank Rate, the net impact of energy and the other shocks hitting
the economy would have kept inflation above target in the medium-term.
The key question for me in recent months, has been whether we had tightened enough.
Commentary often focuses on whether Bank Rate has changed at a particular meeting, or
on the size of the change. But it is the level of interest rates that matters for businesses’
plans and people’s everyday spending decisions, and therefore for the impact on inflation.
Calibrating the required level of interest rates needs to take account of the rapid pace of
tightening to date and the lag before its full impact on the economy. This is the fastest
tightening in policy in the MPC’s history, with interest rates rising almost 3 percentage
points in 12 months.20 Adding to that, the yield curve has steepened considerably, such
that the tightening in financial conditions overall has been even larger, and even faster.
But with policy tightening so much, so quickly, inflation outturns today only reflect a small
proportion of the impact already in train. The typical sequence of policy transmission is that
higher interest rates first reduce spending, which then feeds through to lower labour
demand and higher unemployment, and finally through to wages and prices. By the time
that transmission has completed, a long time has elapsed, so the data we now observe
depend on policy some months or years ago. There are some effects – particularly via the
exchange rate – that reduce inflation more quickly, but most take longer. These lags are

20

Some have argued that given increases in inflation, the aggregate real interest rate has nonetheless fallen,
and therefore the policy stance remains loose. This would be the case if high inflation or inflation
expectations were increasing demand through intertemporal substitution. But the aggregate inflation rate is
not likely to be the relevant one for this channel. It is not possible to substitute energy use over time, so
higher energy prices will depress demand rather than increase it. The inflation rate and expected inflation in
goods and services that are substitutable over time is likely to be far lower.

Bank of England

Page 17

precisely why we use our forecasts to assess what policy is required to get inflation to
target over the next couple of years.
My colleague Ben Broadbent (2022) recently showed that using the Bank’s usual
forecasting estimates, only around a quarter of the cumulative tightening had fed through
to demand. So far, demand has indeed weakened, with the data suggesting the UK is
likely to be in recession in Q4. This is partly the result of tighter policy, but so far, mainly
the result of lower real incomes.
A key channel of monetary policy comes through mortgage lending and the housing
market. Based on current market pricing, higher mortgage repayments alone will cause a
significant slowing in the economy. And these impacts are likely to be more delayed than
in the past, given the vast majority of mortgage debt is now on short-term fixed rates,
rather than variable rates.
Chart 8 illustrates the scale and timing of these effects. It shows the change in total
mortgage repayments as a share of consumption spending since the start of the year, if
new fixed-rate mortgage rates were to stay at their recent peaks of around 6.5%
indefinitely, and variable-rate mortgage rates were to rise gradually to the same level. In
the experiment, by 2027, almost all 8 million mortgagors would have had to refinance at
markedly higher rates. The increase in repayments would represent around 2.7% of
annual consumption. But given the mechanical lags in the process, almost all of those
increases have yet to occur. Around 40% of the total would come through by the middle of
2023, rising to 80% by the end of 2025.

Chart 8: Vast majority of increase in mortgage repayments yet to come
Change in mortgage repayments as a share of consumption with mortgage
rates at 6.5%, taking into account the distribution of mortgage terms (a)

Sources: ONS, FCA Product Sales Data, Bank of England and Bank calculations.

Bank of England

Page 18

(a) Repayments from January 2022 to September 2022 are calculated using the effective stock mortgage
rate and the stock of UK mortgage debt, both from Bank of England data. The average remaining term on
outstanding mortgages is assumed to be 20 years. Repayment profile from October 2022 is calculated using
the distribution of fixed deal terms from the FCA Product Sales Data. All fixed rate mortgages are assumed
to reprice at 6.5% as soon as their fixed term is over; variable rate mortgages rates are assumed to gradually
increase to 6.5%.

This experiment is illustrative, and is likely to overstate the eventual impact on
consumption from this channel alone. Mortgage rates rose quickly in response to higher
yields in September, but yields have since fallen from their peaks. The November MPC
meeting minutes record that the majority of the MPC also expected that, if the economy
was to evolve broadly in line with its forecast, Bank Rate would not be required to increase
as much as was priced into financial markets. So we should expect mortgage rates to fall
back somewhat from current levels. Borrowers also have other ways to adjust, and most
will not reduce consumption one-for-one. Some will choose to reduce saving, or seek
opportunities to earn more, while others may be able to lower their mortgage repayments
by changing their terms, or paying down some of their loan.
However there are also reasons why there could be larger, or additional effects on
consumption. The burden of higher mortgage payments will not be distributed equally,
which increases the chances that those most affected cut back spending sharply. Past
experience suggests that households tend to prioritise their mortgage repayments over all
other spending, as occurred during the 2008 financial crisis. Comparing to that period, the
orange line Chart 9 shows how aggregate mortgage repayments would change, as a
share of current household income, under the same assumptions as Chart 8. At the
economy-wide level, they would increase markedly, although would still not reach their
2008 peak. But that is partly because there are now fewer mortgagors than in the past. As
a share of total mortgagor income, total repayments would reach around their 2008 peak
over the next 3 years. Higher mortgage repayments will be compounded by the rise in
energy costs, which has already been squeezing incomes.

Bank of England

Page 19

Chart 9: Mortgage repayment burden would increase steadily at higher rates
Estimated UK household debt service ratio, illustrative forecast with mortgage rates at
6.5%, taking into account the distribution of mortgage terms (a)

Sources: ONS, FCA Product Sales Data, Bank of England and Bank calculations.
(a) Mortgage debt service ratio is mortgage repayment over household income. Mortgage repayment data
from 1985 Q1 to 2022 Q2 are calculated using the effective stock mortgage rate and the stock of UK
mortgage debt, both from Bank of England data. They are not adjusted for MIRAS. The average remaining
term on outstanding mortgages is assumed to be 15 years. Repayment profile from 2022 Q3 onwards is
calculated using the distribution of fixed deal terms from the FCA Product Sales Data. All fixed rate
mortgages are assumed to reprice at 6.5% as soon as their fixed term is over; variable rate mortgages rates
are assumed to gradually increase to 6.5%. Household income is total household resources (ONS code
rpqk.q), and is held fixed from 2022 Q2 onwards.

Among the distribution of mortgage holders, there are also likely to be subsets who are
particularly affected. There is a risk that those with high debt service ratios may respond
by cutting consumption more sharply. These households tend to be younger, have lower
incomes, and have lower savings to draw on. Those whose debt service ratios are pushed
highest may get into repayment difficulties, or in the extreme, default.
Chart 10 shows how the distribution of these debt service ratios would change over the
next two years if households refinancing had to do so at 6.5%. The metric here shows
mortgage repayments as a proportion of income after payment of energy costs. For
example, the rightmost bars show that the proportion of mortgagors paying over half of
their remaining income towards their mortgage would triple to around 11%. The increase in
the right tail of the distribution shows an increase in the number of households who would
need to put very large shares of their income towards their mortgages, and struggle with
repayments. But even at lower DSRs, a larger group of households would be likely to cut
back their consumption sharply in order to afford higher repayments.

Bank of England

Page 20

Chart 10: Mortgage repayment burden would increase steadily at higher rates
Distribution of mortgage debt service ratios, adjusted for energy costs, taking into
account the distribution of mortgage terms (a)

Sources: ONS, FCA Product Sales Data, Bank of England, NMG Consulting and Bank calculations.
(a) Mortgage debt service ratio is mortgage repayment over household income less energy costs.
Distribution of initial debt service ratios from the 2022 H1 Bank/NMG Household Survey. Changes in
repayments are calculated using the distribution of fixed deal terms from the FCA Product Sales Data. All
fixed rate mortgages are assumed to reprice at 6.5% as soon as their fixed term is over; variable rate
mortgages rates are assumed to increase to 6.5% immediately. Household income is held fixed.

As well as the impacts on consumption, and even in the absence of large numbers of
defaults, the reduction in affordability already appears to be affecting the housing market.
There are signs that the rapid house-price increases of the past two years have started to
reverse (Chart 11). To the extent that sellers are reluctant to sell at a reduced price, lower
housing demand is likely to show up also in lower transactions, which will reduce housing
investment and associated consumption.21

21

See Bracke and Tenreyro (2021), ‘History Dependence in the Housing Market’ for evidence.

Bank of England

Page 21

Chart 11: House price indicators are weakening
House price inflation, three months on three months earlier (a)

Sources: Halifax House Price Index by IHS Markit, HM Land Registry, Nationwide and Bank calculations.
(a) Latest data point is October 2022 for Rightmove, Nationwide and Halifax, and August 2022 for the UK
house price index. The Rightmove series is seasonally adjusted by Bank staff.

In the MPC’s November forecast, if policy were to follow market-implied interest rates,
these different housing-market channels, combined with the energy-price related falls in
real income, would push the economy into a prolonged recession. Unemployment would
rise significantly, driving further falls in real wage growth. And we would expect inflation to
fall well below target in the medium-term, once the direct and indirect impacts of higher
energy prices had dropped out of the inflation calculation. In the face of lagged impacts,
we must look ahead to the effect of policy on the medium-term outlook for inflation. And
given the outlook, I would view such a policy path as inconsistent with our target.

6. Policy outlook
To judge whether policy has tightened enough, one can also look at MPC forecasts that
assume the policy interest rate is unchanged. Chart 12 shows that with Bank Rate held at
its new level of 3%, the MPC’s modal forecast was for CPI inflation to fall back to target
after 18 months, before falling further below target, to 0.8%, by the end of the third year of
the forecast. The economy would still fall into recession, although this would be less
severe, and demand would stay persistently below potential. Even at the previous level of
Bank Rate at 2.25%, inflation was most likely to fall below target in the medium term.

Bank of England

Page 22

Chart 12: November 2022 MPR CPI projection based on constant interest rates
at 3%

See footnotes in the November 2022 Monetary Policy Report.

These forecasts suggested to me that policy was already in restrictive territory ahead of
our November meeting. And given the policy lags I have discussed, it had probably been
restrictive for some time before. Moreover, since our convention is to only incorporate
announced fiscal policy, those forecasts did not include any potential tightening in the
fiscal stance. I judged that in the most likely scenario, we had already done enough to
bring inflation rapidly back to, and then below target. Despite that, I voted in November for
a further 0.25 percentage point increase in Bank Rate, to 2.5%.
My main rationale for a further tightening was risk management. While forecasts are
essential to forward-looking policy, they are also inherently uncertain. Most obviously, our
inflation forecast is highly dependent on the path for energy prices. But we also face two
key uncertainties over how quickly and how far domestic wage and price inflation will
weaken. First, over the scale of second-round effects stemming from very high headline
inflation. If there is more price and wage inertia than we expect, this will make domestic
inflationary pressures slower to fall back when energy prices stop rising.
Second, while we can now see demand weakening in the data, there remains uncertainty
about exactly how that will affect the labour market and inflation, which, based on past
evidence come later in the transmission chain. Output has fallen, including for services,
and business and consumer indicators are consistent with the economy having entered
recession. We are also now seeing some signs of that feeding through to labour demand.
But it is too early to judge whether the labour market will loosen and wage growth and
services price inflation will fall back exactly as in our forecast. For the moment, the labour

Bank of England

Page 23

market remains tight, and domestic cost pressures remain well above target-consistent
levels.
Given those uncertainties, I judged in November that there was a case for tightening
further into restrictive territory, to guard against the risk that inflation does not fall as far or
as quickly as I expect. The majority of the MPC voted in November for a larger rate
increase to 3 per cent. From my perspective, with the policy stance tightened further into
restrictive territory, I expect this risk management rationale to be weaker in future months.
The higher is the level of interest rates, the lower are the chances of tightening too little,
and the further below target inflation could fall in the medium term.
To illustrate more firmly the ways in which my view of the required policy might evolve,
Chart 13 presents some interest rate paths, under three different stylised scenarios.
These show my own judgements on what strategy might be required, depending on how
the data evolve, rather than any model-based results. I would stress that these reflect only
my own individual expectations and assessment of risk, and not those of the committee as
a whole. Even if one of these scenarios were to come to pass, I only have one of nine
votes, and as in November, mine may be in the minority. And given my term on the MPC
will finish in the middle of next year, some of these votes will be cast by my successor.

Chart 13: Scenarios for future Bank Rate

The central scenario represents what I think would be required if the economy were to
evolve broadly in line with the MPC’s November MPR forecast. I would expect that
Bank Rate held at 3% over 2023 would reduce output further below potential, given the
effects of lower real incomes and the lagged impact of the tightening to date. Policy would
then have to loosen, perhaps in 2024, to try to prevent inflation falling below target.
In the other two scenarios I assume that demand conditions evolve in a similar way, but
that there are differences in how that feeds through to inflation. The upside scenario shows

Bank of England

Page 24

how my votes could evolve if demand weakness does not feed through into a looser labour
market as in our forecast, or if high-frequency readings of domestic wage and price
pressures accelerate, rather than fall back. Policy would have to tighten further to ensure
the downturn was large enough to bring inflation back to target. I would anticipate this
scenario would create a larger demand shortfall and medium-term inflation undershoot,
and policy may have to cut rates more aggressively in 2024, once inflation had fallen back.
Finally, the downside scenario assumes that we see a faster and deeper turnaround in the
labour market, wage growth and inflation, such that Bank Rate is cut earlier, at some point
in 2023.
Under any scenario, and whatever new shocks affect the economy over the next few
years, the goal will be unchanged. Policymakers will need to find the appropriate path,
sustainably, to the 2% target.

I would like to thank Jenny Chan, Derrick Kanngiesser, Michael McLeay, Alberto Polo,
May Rostom, James Tasker, Ryland Thomas and Lukas von dem Berge for their help
producing this speech. I am also grateful to Andrew Bailey, Sarah Breeden, Fabrizio
Cadamagnani, Julia Giese, Richard Harrison, Jonathan Haskel, Josh Martin, Huw Pill,
Marek Rojicek, Andrea Rosen, Martin Seneca and Fergal Shortall for helpful comments.

