The Asian Crisis: lessons for crisis management and
prevention
Speech given by
Professor Brealey, special advisor to the Governor on financial stability

15 August 1999

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

The Asian crisis: lessons for crisis management and
prevention
In this speech,(1) Professor Brealey, special adviser to the Governor on financial stability issues,(2)
discusses the succession of financial crises that swept through Asia, Russia and Latin America in 1997
and 1998, and the resulting considerable debate about both the role of the IMF and possible actions to
limit further crises. Some have argued that international financial markets do not function well and are
subject to periodic contagious panics that can be stemmed by an international lender of last resort.
Professor Brealey argues that the IMF has neither the resources nor the superior information to fulfil such
a role. However, there may be a need for an international financial institution that can use its leverage to
secure policy changes in the affected countries. Professor Brealey also takes issue with the view that the
IMF is simply bailing out imprudent international banks and that measures are needed to bail them back
in again. He argues that the source of the Asian crisis lay in the real economy, but the effect of the crisis
was greatly exacerbated by the financial structure of the affected countries. In particular, much of the risk
was borne by domestic banks which borrowed dollars in the short-term interbank market and made
longer-term loans in the local currency. Public policy needs to be directed to ensuring that the risks in
emerging markets are distributed efficiently across foreign and domestic investors. That involves greater
use of equity finance and structured debt.

Introduction
Woody Allen in a graduation day speech remarked:
‘More than any other time in history, mankind faces a
crossroads. One path leads to despair and utter
hopelessness. The other to total extinction. Let us pray we
have the wisdom to choose correctly’.
The international financial institutions must have felt that
they confronted a similar predicament when faced by the
successive financial crises in Asia, Russia and Brazil. These
events have prompted renewed debate about crisis
prevention and resolution. In particular, it has been argued
that the IMF should serve as an international equivalent of
the domestic lender of last resort that can assist countries hit
by a creditor panic or currency flight. The difficulties for
the IMF in fulfilling this role are its relative lack of
resources and the problem of distinguishing between the
illiquid and the insolvent borrower. Moreover, as is shown
later, the response of asset prices to the announcement of
IMF assistance provides little encouragement for the view
that the IMF’s intervention helps countries to resolve a
problem of financial panics. An alternative role for the IMF
is to use its leverage to enforce policy changes on affected
countries. This role does not assume that a country’s
creditors are subject to contagious panics, and the form and
quantity of assistance that is needed to impose conditions
are not the same as are required to stem a creditor panic.

The fact that IMF support has been a response to the
withdrawal of funds by international banks (and capital
flight by domestic investors) has led to concern that the IMF
is simply bailing out the banks, and thus to calls for a
redistribution of the burden. This view seems to be
coloured by the assumption that international banking is not
a competitive activity, so that the banks are able to collect
economic rents from the IMF’s assistance. Proposals for
burden-sharing also assume that the form of private sector
lending would be unaffected by attempts to ‘bail in’ the
private sector. A related concern is that the prospect of IMF
assistance to troubled countries leads to a moral hazard
problem on the part of both lenders and borrowers. This
moral hazard argument does not sit well with the huge
losses that have been made by foreign investors in the
affected countries, nor with the extreme reluctance on the
part of borrowers to seek IMF assistance.
The strong limitations on the international community to
resolve a major international financial crisis suggest that the
focus of public policy should be on crisis prevention rather
than resolution. It is foolish to look for a single panacea.
Debate has focused inter alia on alternative exchange rate
systems, the structure of banking and bank supervision in
emerging markets, and on the systems of corporate
governance and control (‘crony capitalism’). Rather less
attention has been paid to the issues of capital structure. It
is clear, however, that the capital structures of governments,
financial institutions and corporations contributed to the

(1) This paper was originally published in the Journal of International Finance (1999), Vol 2:2, pages 249–72. Earlier versions of the paper were
presented at an IFA Donor seminar at the London Business School and at the 1998 Capital Markets Conference in Stockholm. I am grateful for
comments from Xavier Freixas, Andrew Haldane, Costas Kaplanis, Mervyn King, and Oren Sussman. The views expressed in the paper are,
nevertheless, personal views and do not necessarily represent the views of the Bank of England.
(2) Also of London Business School.

285

Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin: August 1999

severity of the crises in the affected countries. In particular,
the high levels of bank borrowing and the maturity and
currency mismatches incurred by the banks endangered
their solvency, and limited the policy responses of
governments.
This paper is set out as follows. The first section provides a
brief background to the Asian crisis and the events that led
up to it. The next section discusses the role of the IMF and
the related issues of burden-sharing and moral hazard. The
third section turns to the topic of crisis prevention, and
discusses the role of capital structure in reallocating the real
risks in emerging market economies. The fourth section
briefly reviews some of the policy implications, and the final
section concludes.

The Asian financial crisis
The onset of the Asian financial crisis
The float of the Thai baht in July 1997 was the first step in a
series of financial crises that first swept through Thailand,
the Phillippines, Malaysia, Indonesia and Korea, and
subsequently spread to Russia and on to Brazil. In each of
the affected Asian countries, there was a substantial flight of
capital, both by domestic and international investors.
Foreign exchange reserves, which had been growing rapidly,
were depleted even more rapidly, with Korea losing
$25 billion in usable reserves in just over a month.
Throughout the region governments attempted with little
success to stem this pressure on reserves by increasing
short-term interest rates; rates in Indonesia rose to over
80%. The capital flight resulted in a remarkable period of
turbulence in the foreign exchange markets. Volatility in the
rupiah, which had been a fraction of 1% per day under the
crawling peg, reached 12% per day,(1) roughly the annual
volatility of most Western equity markets. By its low point
in 1998, the rupiah had lost 80% of its value in nominal
terms and about 70% in real terms. Each of the other
affected Asian currencies depreciated by more than 38%.
Many of the crisis countries found themselves in a debt trap,
where the cost of rolling over loans forced them into
spiralling debt levels and public sector deficits. In such
cases, the reduction in wealth which would be needed to
escape from such a trap was politically infeasible. Raising
interest rates to protect the currency increased the burden of
servicing domestic government debt and drove the
government into yet larger deficits, while allowing the
currency to depreciate increased the cost of foreign currency
debt and threatened the solvency of the banking system
through which much of the debt was channelled.
Concerns over possible defaults caused the spread over
US Treasuries to widen to between 8% and 18% for the
affected Asian countries. Each country also experienced a
run on the banks. Since the second half of 1997, several
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

International Monetary Fund (1998a).
Institute of International Finance, press release April 13, 1999.
Jackson (1999).
Institute of International Finance (1999a).

286

hundred financial institutions have been closed down,
suspended or nationalised, and recapitalisation needs are
estimated to range between 18%–34% of GDP for the crisis
countries.
The consequences for all the affected countries have been
severe. In 1998 GDP fell by 14% in Indonesia and by an
average of more than 7% in the five affected Asian
countries, although income per head was still substantially
higher than at the start of the decade. Around $120 billion
of capital has left these countries. Would-be borrowers in
many developing countries have been effectively cut off
from access to the capital markets, while liquidity has been
severely affected and spreads have increased. The losses to
foreign creditors and equity investors in East Asia and
Russia amount to an estimated $350 billion.(2)
The East Asian story has since been more or less repeated in
the other crisis countries. In each case, capital flight has put
pressure on reserves, which the government has attempted to
fight with very high domestic interest rates and fiscal
restraint. The depth of the problem in Russia and the
reluctance of the government to pass needed reforms has
resulted in a debt moratorium and de facto default.
The seeds of the crisis
What was so surprising about these events at the time was
that many of the countries had seemed to be models of
economic success. In the words of one commentator, ‘From
1945 to 1997 the Asian economic miracle fueled the greatest
expansion of wealth, for the largest number of persons, in
the history of mankind’.(3) In the affected Asian countries,
growth in real GDP had averaged 7% a year since 1990,
with relatively little pressure on consumer prices. Brazilian
real GDP grew at an annual rate of 4.5% between 1993 and
1996, while in five years inflation fell from 2,500% to less
than 3%. Even Russia appeared to be making progress.
Inflation in 1997 was below 15%, compared with nearly
900% five years earlier. The rouble had stabilised, and GDP
grew slightly in 1997 after declining in each of the previous
five years.
However, it is easy with hindsight to see that the seeds of
the emerging market crisis of 1997–98 were sown earlier in
the 1990s, when improvements in the access to financial
markets and apparent high returns on investments caused a
surge of capital inflows into many emerging markets. By
1996, the total net private capital inflow to the affected
Asian countries had reached $73 billion dollars, up from just
$25 billion six years earlier.
The risks involved in this huge capital inflow to Asian
emerging markets were exacerbated by the fact that most of
it was in the form of bank debt. In 1996, the year preceding
the Asian crisis, 61% of the capital flows to the affected
countries consisted of bank lending.(4) Most of the external

The Asian crisis: lessons for crisis management and prevention

debt was contracted by the private sector and, except in
Indonesia, the money was largely channelled through local
banks that relent the money to local businesses. Net
interbank borrowing by banks in the five most troubled
Asian countries amounted to about $43 billion annually
during 1995 and 1996. Most of this lending was
denominated in dollars. Foreign bank debt amounted to
45% of GDP in Thailand, 35% in Indonesia and 25% in
Korea. This debt generally had a maturity of less than one
year.(1) In contrast, the average maturity of the loans made
to local companies by the banks was longer than a year and
the loans were commonly denominated in the local
currency. Thus banks assumed both a maturity mismatch
and a currency mismatch. In Thailand, where there are
restrictions on the open foreign exchange positions of banks,
the banks limited their currency risk by relending in dollars.
However, since their clients did not have the foreign
currency earnings to repay these debts, the banks simply
traded a currency risk for a credit risk.
During the 1990s, bank credit in most Asian countries grew
rapidly, by between 12%–18% per annum in real terms. In
many countries, this resulted in large exposures to particular
sectors, notably property,(2) and to overconcentration of
lending to single borrowers. In Korea, the average book
debt-to-equity ratio of the corporate sector reached nearly
200% and the top 30 chaebols had a debt-equity ratio of
more than 400%. This is despite the fact that even before
the onset of the crisis these chaebols were barely
profitable.(3) The weakness in the banking system was (as
so often) hidden by the gap between the book and market
value of the loans. Moody’s has estimated that in Indonesia,
the proportion of loans that are non-performing could be as
high as 75%. In Korea, non-performing loans may amount
to 150 trillion won.
Most currencies were pegged principally against the dollar,
despite the fact that a high and increasing proportion of
external trade was with countries in the Asian region. These
currency pegs had the effect of disguising the risks involved
in the foreign currency loans, and offered apparent low-risk
profits on investment in local fixed interest markets. Thus
the capital inflow partly reflected ‘arbitrage’ activity by
banks and investors, who were able to borrow dollars and
relend in the local currency at a profit, as long as the peg to
the dollar was maintained. The currency peg also meant
that the risk was largely a jump risk, where the high
probability of a small profit disguised the smaller chance of
a substantial loss. Thus, when the currencies began to
depreciate, there was little opportunity for banks to take
corrective action by lifting their positions.
What made the currency pegs unsustainable was the sharp
fall in the growth in exports from the region. This stemmed
from a combination of an appreciation in the real exchange
rates, particularly relative to the yen, together with the weak

Japanese economy, increasing competition in export markets
from China and Mexico, and excess capacity in many
exporting industries such as the semiconductor,
petrochemical and automobile industries. By 1996 the
current account deficit in the five Asian countries had
reached $55 billion.

The international response to financial crises
The events of 1997–98 have prompted increased debate
about the international response to such financial crises.
This section considers the role of international institutions in
crisis prevention and management. Specifically, it seeks to
answer the following questions:
●
●
●
●
●

What is the role of the IMF?
Who benefits from IMF assistance?
How should the burden be shared?
How serious is the problem of moral hazard?
How can the IMF help with crisis prevention?

What is the role of the IMF?
The IMF was established in 1947 to buttress the Bretton
Woods’s system of fixed exchange rates, and was intended
to provide temporary assistance in the event of destabilising
speculation and consequent balance of payments difficulties.
But its role has changed to one of engineering major
structural reforms and providing assistance in the face of
possible default on international loans.
Much of the debate on the effectiveness of the IMF in
the recent international crises has centred on the
appropriateness of its programmes. But there have also
been more fundamental questions about its role in crisis
management and prevention. Why would the private sector
not be prepared to lend to affected countries at ‘fair market
rates’—is there an imperfection in the private capital
markets that justifies the existence of an international lender
of last resort? Are there multiple equilibria in financial
markets, so that a simple nudge from an international
financial institution could transport us safely from a bad
equilibrium to a good one? Unless these questions can be
answered, we do not know whether an IMF is needed at all,
or in what circumstances and in what form it should provide
assistance.
The following quotations illustrate the sharp divergence of
opinion over these issues:
‘The crises have brought home the absolute indispensability
of the IMF as the core provider of emergency, conditioned
international support to countries in financial difficulty….
Without the IMF, even those countries that are committed to
reform might face default… which could have devastating
effects on their own economies and significantly raise the
risks of contagion in other markets.’ Larry Summers (1998).

(1) In a probit analysis of financial crises in emerging markets, Radelet and Sachs (1998) find that the ratio of short-term debt to reserves is strongly
associated with the onset of a crisis.
(2) In 1996, property lending as a percentage of total lending was 25% in Malaysia, 20% in Indonesia, and 18% in Thailand (International Monetary
Fund, 1998b).
(3) For example, in early 1997 six chaebols filed for bankruptcy (International Monetary Fund, 1998b).

287

Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin: August 1999

‘... the question is whether there is a need for an agency that
will act as lender of last resort for countries facing a crisis.
There is such a need: it arises both because international
capital flows are not only extremely volatile but also
contagious, exhibiting the classic signs of financial panics,
and because an international lender of last resort can help
mitigate the effects of this instability, and perhaps the
instability itself…. I will argue not only that the
international system needs a lender of last resort, but also
that the IMF is increasingly playing that role and that
changes in the international system now under consideration
will make it possible for it to exercise that function more
effectively.’ Stanley Fischer (1999).
‘IMF resources have been used to ‘bail out insolvent
emerging market banks and international bank lenders’. The
costs have been (1) undesirable redistributions of wealth
from taxpayers to politically influential oligarchs in
developing economies; (2) the promotion of excessive
risk-taking and inefficient investment; (3) the undermining
of the natural process of deregulation and economic and
political reform which global competition would otherwise
promote.’ Charles Calomiris (1998).
‘The role of a lender of last resort is not to bail out failed
banks. Its job is to assure that solvent financial institutions
do not fail because of lack of liquidity…. Since 1971, the
IMF has been looking for new things to do. It has now
solved its problem by creating moral hazard, allowing
international banks to avoid the risks they undertake by
imprudent lending. The IMF encourages the behavior that
creates the problems.’ Alan Meltzer (1998).
In common with most advocates of active IMF involvement,
both Summers and Fischer emphasise the danger of ‘panics’
in financial markets and of consequent ‘contagion.’ By
contrast, Calomiris and Meltzer place more weight on the
dangers of moral hazard that result from the prospect of an
IMF ‘bail-out.’
One of the roles envisaged for the IMF, and suggested in
Stanley Fischer’s 1999 paper, is as an international
equivalent of the domestic lender of last resort.(1) The
function of the domestic lender of last resort is to prevent
destabilising runs on the banking system. One way that this
could arise is from a liquidity mismatch. For example, a
bank may be solvent as long as all depositors agree to
maintain their investment, but subject to a run if each
depositor is concerned that others are about to withdraw
their cash. This possibility stems from the fact that
depositors cannot coordinate their actions. One solution is
to establish a benevolent lender of last resort, that can
prevent such runs simply by standing ready to provide
whatever liquidity is needed.(2)
In practice, pure liquidity panics are rare and bank runs are
more often motivated by insolvency worries. Here also

problems may arise because depositors are unable to
coordinate their actions or pool their information. For
example, each depositor may rationally draw inferences
about the bank’s solvency from the actions of the other
depositors. So a small initial loss of deposits can lead to a
cascade of withdrawals.(3) If a lender of last resort has
superior information or can pool the information available to
individual depositors, it may be able to distinguish a bad
cascade from a good cascade and nudge the market towards
the appropriate outcome.(4)
The liberalisation of the world’s capital markets in the last
twenty years has led to large capital flows into and out of
emerging markets. While this is not necessarily a cause for
concern, it may leave countries exposed to the type of
liquidity or information-motivated panics that are used to
justify a domestic lender of last resort. An international
lender of last resort is clearly not necessary to protect a
country’s banking system against runs on its domestic book,
but may, for example, be needed where banks have large
foreign currency books.
This view, that there is an important role for an international
lender of last resort, relies heavily on the view that financial
markets are prone to bubbles, panics and contagion.
However, while models of rational multiple equilibria that
produce bubbles and panics may be fun to construct, it is not
clear that they work better than simpler models. For
example, surveys of bank runs suggest that these runs
generally reflect shared and justified worries about the
bank’s solvency, and that well-capitalised banks are not
subject to runs (see, for example, Kaufman (1994)). If
financial markets do function well most of the time and
aggregate information efficiently, then the capital
withdrawals that have been experienced in a number of
emerging markets are more likely to indicate basic structural
weaknesses in the country’s banking and exchange rate
system than a failure of coordination between lenders.
Thus the case for an international lender of last resort
depends heavily on the lender’s access to superior
information on the solvency of the country’s banking
system.
Unlike a domestic lender of last resort, the IMF’s ability to
respond to a liquidity run is limited by its lack of resources.
For example, between 1992 and 1996 the net amount
disbursed by the IMF under the Standby Arrangements and
Extended Fund Facilities was about $18 billion. During the
same period the total net private capital flows to emerging
markets was more than $1 trillion. The events of 1997–98
led to an increase of two thirds in the IMF’s net lending.
Nevertheless, at the end of January 1999 the total amount
owing to the IMF under Standby Arrangements and
Extended Fund Facilities was still only $41 billion, far
smaller than the amount of private capital that has been
withdrawn from emerging markets.

(1) See also Sachs (1995).
(2) The role of a lender of last resort in preventing liquidity runs was first suggested by Thornton (1802) and developed by Bagehot (1873). A formal
model of bank runs is provided by Diamond and Dybvig (1983).
(3) For early models of rational cascades, see Banerjee (1992) and Welch (1992).
(4) It is also sometimes argued that an international lender of last resort is needed to counter attempts at market manipulation, or irrational speculation
that leads to excess volatility in asset prices.

288

The Asian crisis: lessons for crisis management and prevention

This lack of resources may be less crucial in the case of a
solvency run. If the IMF does have superior information
that allows it to distinguish between solvent and insolvent
countries, then its willingness to put its money where its
mouth is could serve as an important signal to the private
sector. Such a signal could bring large welfare gains to the
country in the form of reduced costs of further private sector
credit (and an unrecoverable windfall gain to the value of
existing loans by private sector banks).
Unfortunately, the signals provided by the IMF’s
involvement are likely to be mixed. Recourse to the IMF
generally occurs only when the patient is in need of
intensive care. As Radelet and Sachs (1998) suggest, the
‘arrival of the IMF gives all the confidence of seeing an
ambulance outside one’s door.’ So news that the IMF is
willing to provide assistance may be overshadowed by the
news that the country needs it. Moreover, even if the IMF is
particularly well qualified to assess country prospects, it is
often under strong political pressure to extend assistance to
borrowers, such as Russia, where there are clear doubts
about the country’s ability to service its debts. This muddies
the signal provided by IMF assistance.
An alternative rationale for the IMF is that while private
sector lenders may wish to impose conditions on the local
government, they find it difficult to do so. Thus the IMF
may be able to attach conditions that would be impossible
for the private sector.(1) If this is the case, there could be an
overall welfare gain. Of course, this raises the question as
to why the government could not voluntarily bind itself to
the same courses of action at the time that the loan is
needed. The answer may lie partly in the difficulty of
specifying these actions ex ante (hence the use of staged
IMF lending), or in the fact that a populist government may
find it easier to justify to its citizens conditions that have
been imposed by an external body. The fact that the
required reforms are packaged with IMF lending both
allows the IMF to exert leverage and provides an incentive
for it to monitor the implementation of the reforms.
However, the gains in this case may be linked only weakly
with the extent of the support.
These two models of the IMF’s role do not sit happily
together and have different implications for the form of its
assistance. For example, there is little place for staged
lending or conditionality for a lender of last resort, whose
function is to stem a panic resulting from liquidity or
solvency concerns. On the other hand, staged lending is an
essential tool for enforcing policy changes.
Who benefits from IMF assistance?
It is not easy to measure the effect of IMF programs, and
more often than not the debate is liable to get mired in
counterfactual speculation about what might have happened
in the absence of support. An alternative approach is to

focus on changes in asset values at the time of the
announcement of IMF assistance. In some ongoing research
with Evi Kaplanis of LBS I have been looking at the relative
performance of equities, bonds and currencies in the weeks
surrounding the announcement of IMF support.(2) The
results are preliminary, but they suggest three things:
(1)

During the two years preceding the announcement of
support, there is a sharp relative fall in equity prices in
the affected countries. Bond prices and exchange
rates also decline sharply, though this fall is over a
shorter period.

(2)

In the days immediately following the announcement
of IMF support, there is no statistically significant
change in the value of each asset class.

(3)

In the months following the announcement of IMF
support, asset prices show little abnormal movement.
This is exactly what any believer in efficient markets
would predict, but it does not support those who
believe that markets are seized by irrational panics
that cause them to overshoot.

If these results stand up to further analysis, then it is
difficult to argue that the IMF decision to provide assistance
is an important signal as to the health of the beneficiary, or
that it provides information to the markets about the
recipient’s willingness to accept desirable reforms.
However, the tests are insufficiently powerful to determine
whether there is a gain in asset values that exceeds the very
limited degree of subsidy in the IMF assistance.
How should the burden be shared?
IMF assistance is typically a response to a flight of private
capital from the affected country. Often the cash helps the
country to repay maturing debts. This has prompted
concern that the IMF is simply bailing out the international
lending banks and that there should be some form of
burden-sharing.
It seems unlikely that IMF aid simply goes into the pockets
of the international lending banks. International banking is
a highly competitive activity and the prospect that IMF
support may be available in the event of difficulties is likely
to be reflected in the interest rates that banks charge. Of
course, in this case IMF assistance would be simply a form
of aid, the benefits of which are shared between the
fortunate countries that do not subsequently require
assistance and the unfortunate ones that do.
If IMF assistance enables countries to repay maturing bank
debts, any unanticipated announcement of assistance would
result in an increase in the value of the equity of lending
banks. In practice, there do not appear to be any abnormal
returns in equity prices of international banks, which may

(1) The IMF’s experience in dealing with crisis situations may also give it an important consultancy role in determining the appropriate policy
response.
(2) Returns are measured relative to returns on similar assets in a sample of emerging markets. The results of the exercise are similar regardless of
whether the announcement date is defined either by a news or press release by the IMF, or by press comment that may precede such a release.

289

Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin: August 1999

suggest either that the IMF assistance is regarded as an
automatic response to a balance of payments crisis and is
therefore fully anticipated, or (more likely) that the news of
IMF assistance percolates slowly and the amount of the
subsidy is too small to observe.
If IMF support does result in an increase in the value of
private sector debt, the IMF could try to recapture some of
these value enhancements by arranging, for example, a
moratorium on private sector debt. Certainly, the IMF may
have a coordinating role between private lenders, in cases
where they have a common interest in renewing their lines.
This is the crisis manager role that has been described by
Stanley Fischer (1999). However, the suggestion of
compulsion would not sit well with the arguments that have
been made for an international lender of last resort. If
private sector lenders are reluctant to continue to lend even
when the IMF has offered assistance, there is a message that
one would do well to heed.
If some form of enforced ‘burden-sharing’ was anticipated,
it would be reflected in higher interest rates on developing
country debt. It is also dangerous to assume that the
structure of private sector lending would be independent of
attempts to recapture any value enhancement. In particular,
lenders would have an incentive to structure the debt to
make it easier to exit before the imposition of a moratorium.
This is exactly the opposite of the financial structures that
one would like to see in developing countries.
How serious is the problem of moral hazard?
Critics of the IMF’s role commonly contend that the
prospect of IMF assistance leads to a moral hazard problem.
International banks, it is suggested, are tempted to lend
recklessly to emerging markets, and the governments and
banks in these countries are tempted to borrow excessively.
The first point to make is that this does not necessarily
reduce social welfare; it is arguable that, given the
underdeveloped equity markets in developing economies,
these countries have suffered from a shortage of risk capital
rather than an excess. While this suggests the need to
encourage the supply of equity capital, the existence of an
international financial institution that partially underwrites
the risk of the lending banks may serve as a second-best
solution to the shortage of risk capital.
There is little doubt that the prospect of IMF assistance
creates a potential moral hazard, but, while it is difficult to
provide convincing evidence, it seems likely that the danger
is often overstated. The subsidy in IMF loans is negligible
compared with the losses that have been suffered by
investors in East Asia, Russia and Brazil. Neither the
promised yields nor volatility of emerging market debt is
consistent with the notion that investors regarded these loans
as low risk. Nor does the rapid capital outflow at the onset
of a crisis suggest that investors were confident of being
bailed out if they maintained their positions. Given the

heavy losses that investors have taken on their emerging
market books, their caution was right.(1)
Nor is it clear that the debtors take much comfort in the
prospect of IMF assistance. Not only are governments
generally reluctant to call on IMF help, but the financial
crises in these markets typically impose considerable costs
on all the country’s citizens. In almost all cases, the appeal
for IMF assistance has led to considerable domestic unrest,
a fall in the government, and a change in the governor of the
central bank. It is difficult therefore to believe that
politicians and business people are tempted to pursue
reckless policies in the belief that they will not suffer the
consequences.
The role of the IMF in crisis prevention
Financial crises have resulted in large wealth losses, but
there is relatively little that the IMF can do to replace this
lost wealth. Despite the popular image of huge bailouts, the
subsidy provided by the IMF (or ‘burden’, in the eyes of its
critics) is negligible compared with the wealth losses that
the borrowing countries have experienced. This suggests
that prevention of international crises should take
precedence over cure.
An interesting issue is how far the IMF can play a role
beyond that of an experienced consultant. One problem for
the IMF has been that countries are reluctant to seek
assistance and do so only as a last resort. This shows up in
the preceding asset returns. For example, over the two years
before a country seeks IMF support, equity prices on
average experience a relative decline of 35%. In the case of
bank stocks the relative decline is about 40%. It is possible,
therefore, that the need for IMF assistance would be reduced
if countries could be encouraged to make earlier policy
changes. This seems to be the motive behind President
Clinton’s proposal for contingent credit lines.
Unfortunately, it has proved difficult to devise a scheme that
maximises the Fund’s ability to influence economic policies
without at the same time risking excessive strain on the
Fund’s resources. Suppose, for example, that the IMF
offered a committed line of credit that would be rolled over
as long as the country continues to follow IMF-approved
policies. A country that entered into such an arrangement
would be induced to follow the agreed policies because it
wished both to maintain the insurance of the line of credit
and to avoid the negative signal associated with a refusal to
renew the line. However, such a scheme would also leave
the IMF with a potentially large open liability. It is
probably for this reason that the agreed facility does not
involve a firm commitment on the part of the Fund. Instead,
loans under the facility will depend on the health of the
IMF’s resources,(2) evidence that the country is the victim of
‘contagion’ that is largely outside its control, and the
country’s willingness to pursue a further agreed set of
policies. By seeking to retain leverage at the time that the

(1) Share prices of banks with large exposures to emerging markets have also reflected investor concern about potential losses.
(2) The agreed contingent credit line scheme envisages that a country will normally have access to between 300% and 500% of its Fund quota.

290

The Asian crisis: lessons for crisis management and prevention

was enhanced by their belief that the governments
were committed to maintaining the currency pegs.
Some banks believed that they had hedged the
currency risk by also making dollar loans to local
companies. But, since the borrowers had no dollar
income with which to repay these loans, the banks
found that they had merely substituted credit risk for
currency risk.

funds are released, the IMF is giving up most of the leverage
at the time that the facility is entered into and is reducing
the incentives for any country to apply for the facility. Thus,
in the trade-off between exerting leverage and retaining
flexibility, the Fund has placed almost exclusive emphasis
on flexibility.

Crisis prevention and the lessons from the
Asian crisis

●

We argued above that there are strong limitations to the
ability of any international financial institution to resolve a
major financial crisis, and that the focus of public policy
should be on prevention rather than cure.
Debate about possible policy responses has focused on a
number of issues. First, part of the blame for recent
financial crises has been laid at the door of pegged exchange
rates and this has led to the view that countries need to
choose between freely floating currencies on the one hand
and currency boards or enlarged currency areas on the
other.(1) Second, the substantial capital flows to and from
the affected countries have prompted concern about
excessive speculation and raised the question of whether
governments should throw sand into the speculative
works in the form of a Tobin tax or capital controls.(2) A
third set of issues centres on corporate ownership and
governance in the affected countries, as it has been argued
that discipline has been weakened by the degree of
conglomeration in corporate structures and the close
relationships between non-financial corporations and
banks.(3)
This paper bypasses these issues and focuses instead on the
role of capital structure in the recent financial crises.
Capital structure and the distribution of risk
One of the main lessons of recent events centres on the
distribution of risk. The Asian crisis occurred first in the
real economy, where huge overcapacity and increasing
costs led to a sharp fall in profitability. The crisis in the
real economy showed up in the financial sector in the form
of large capital outflows, falling asset prices and
insolvencies in financial institutions. There are always
likely to be shocks in the real economy, but countries and
their institutions can adopt financial structures which ensure
that the consequences of these shocks are distributed
efficiently. Two features of the financial structure in the
affected Asian countries were a particular source of
difficulty:
●

Many of the banks borrowed dollars and reinvested in
domestic currency loans. Their willingness to do so

The currency mismatch was also accompanied by a
maturity mismatch, with banks funding in the
short-term interbank market and then relending at
longer maturities. Thus banks faced a problem of
rolling over existing loans as they matured, and could
do so only on very unfavourable terms. Governments
also funded themselves with very short-term debt, so
that they too were faced with the problem of rolling
over maturing loans at very high rates. This created a
conflict between the need to reduce the government
deficit and the need to raise interest rates to protect the
currency and thus the cost of foreign currency debt,
much of which was incurred by the banking system.

The choice of financial structure is largely a problem of risk
distribution. Capital can be provided either in the form of
equity or of debt. The heavy reliance on debt finance by
many East Asian companies meant that only a small
reduction in profitability was needed to produce financial
distress and default, the costs of which were borne largely
by local banks. This points to the need to improve the
supply of equity in these countries. This is particularly
important in the case of capital inflows. Since developing
economies are often relatively undiversified, foreign equity
ownership has the advantage of spreading risk more widely.
Foreign equity investment can be either in the form of
portfolio investment or direct investment. Portfolio
investment is more easily reversed than direct investment.
Thus heavy net purchases of East Asian equities by foreign
investors were replaced by modest net sales in 1997.(4)
Although these sales were necessarily taken up by domestic
investors, many of the foreigners who sold their stock
converted the proceeds to dollars and this contributed to the
pressure on exchange rates. In contrast to portfolio
investment in equities, foreign direct investment in the
affected Asian countries declined only modestly, while for
Asia as a whole it actually increased.(5)
Unlike equity, debt brings with it the risk of default, but debt
instruments may differ in a number of ways that affect the
allocation of risk:
●

Currency. The recent financial crises have highlighted
the risks for governments, banks and industrial

(1) If financial crises are a consequence of fixed exchange rates, then it is arguable that the IMF should abandon its traditional role of providing funds
to countries to defend a currency peg. This view was expressed forcefully by Robert Rubin (1999).
(2) For a discussion of the role of capital controls see, for example, Dooley (1996) and Eichengreen, Mussa, et al (1998).
(3) For discussion of these issues, see Myers (1998) and Rajan and Zingales (1998).
(4) Institute of International Finance (1999b).
(5) While foreign direct investment accounted for about half of private capital inflows into all emerging Asian markets before the crisis, it accounted for
only about one sixth of the private flows to the affected countries. This difference between the liquidity of direct and portfolio investment may go
some way towards explaining why some countries were relatively insulated from the shocks that affected other parts of the region. For example,
while China shared the problems of a chronically weak banking system, an ovegeared corporate sector, excess capacity in many industries, and a
sharp expansion of domestic credit, the ratio of foreign direct investment to financial investment in China was substantially higher than in the most
affected countries (Lardy 1999). As a result, China did not experience the capital outflows of its neighbours.

291

Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin: August 1999

of the government’s activities, so that the bondholders
may need to take on part of that risk. The interest
rates adjustment that is needed to enforce real wealth
losses on the bondholders is much smaller if the
government is financed largely by long-term nominal
debt denominated in its domestic currency.

companies of unmatched foreign currency borrowing.
Clearly, loans between different currency zones must
always involve a currency risk for some party, but it is
undesirable that these risks should be concentrated in
the developing country, and particularly in its banking
system.
●

Maturity. Borrowers that finance with a succession
of short-term loans must roll over their loans at rates
that reflect their changing credit risk. As the debt
maturity is lengthened, more of that default risk is
passed to the lender. Thus long-term debt effectively
provides the borrower with insurance against a rise
in the default premium. Of course, such insurance
does not come free, for the lenders will charge a
higher rate of interest on long-term risky loans
(Merton 1974).(1)

●

Guaranteed lines of credit. A related mechanism for
risk-shifting involves guaranteed lines of credit. For
example, a group of foreign banks have entered into a
firm commitment (ie without a ‘material adverse
change’ clause) to lend Argentina up to $7 billion
against collateral at 200 basis points above Libor.
Similarly, Mexico has arranged a simple overdraft
facility for about $3 billion. In both cases the
governments paid a commitment fee and in exchange
the banks took on the risk of movements in the default
premium.

●

Interest rate. Long-term variable-rate debt shifts the
risk of changes in the default premium from the
borrower to the lender. With long-term fixed-rate
debt, both the default premium and the risk-free
interest rate are fixed. In the case of corporate debt,
the impact on risk depends on the effect of interest
rate changes on the value of the firm’s assets.
However, since major financial crises typically involve
both a sharp rise in real interest rates and a fall in the
nominal value of corporate assets, the issue of
fixed-rate debt avoids the prospect of an increase in
debt-servicing costs at a time of declining profits.
Since increases in the domestic short-term interest rate
are a common response to a financial crisis, long-term
fixed-rate government debt frees the government from
the conflict between raising interest rates to protect the
currency and holding down its borrowing costs.
Governments have a further reason to prefer the issue
of fixed-rate, long-term debt, since it plays a role for
governments similar to that of equity. Governments
have uncertain income. If there is an unanticipated
fall in the real value of this income stream, then the
government can seek to recover the deficit from its
citizens in the form of higher taxes or poorer services.
However, particularly in developing countries, it may
be infeasible to require the citizens to bear all the risk

●

Call provision. Call provisions on bonds may have
both a signalling and an incentive effect, since a
borrower that is prepared to pay a premium for the
right to repay early has an incentive to maintain the
value of its debt, and credibly signals its confidence
that it can do so.

●

Structured debt. Structured debt makes it possible to
tailor debt service more closely to the borrower’s
ability to pay. This may be particularly important for
sovereign governments that cannot issue equity
directly. One possible response, suggested by the
insurance industry, is to issue catastrophe or
‘forgiveness’ bonds, the payments on which are
reduced in the event of a defined catastrophe. An
alternative is to index the debt service to some
measure of economic output. Thus Mexico has issued
oil-linked bonds, while Bulgaria has issued
GDP-indexed bonds. A somewhat simpler solution is
to combine an issue of straight debt with simultaneous
commodity or equity swaps. For example, a
government could gain considerable protection against
the effects of an economic crisis by entering into an
equity swap whose payments are linked to the level of
its domestic equity index.(2)

●

Debt conversion. Debt brings with it the risk of
default, and in countries where the bankruptcy code is
undeveloped or its application unpredictable, this may
raise the cost of debt. A somewhat unconventional
solution might be to develop debt that converts
automatically to equity as the value of the borrower’s
assets declines. Since the role of bankruptcy codes is
to ensure the orderly transfer of ownership to the
debt-holders in the event of default, such a security
would build the bankruptcy mechanism directly into
the debt contract and would therefore substitute for
local bankruptcy law.

●

Securitisation. The Asian crisis highlighted the
problems caused by domestic banks which acted as
intermediaries between international lending banks
and local corporate borrowers. The cost of financial
distress in the corporate sector therefore fell first on
the local banking system. This could be avoided if the
debt was securitised or was raised directly from the
overseas banks.

We have argued that the financial crisis in Asia was
exacerbated by the countries’ financial structure, notably the

(1) Note that this does not imply that longer-term debt raises the cost of capital for emerging markets. Capital structure irrelevance propositions are not
violated simply by changes in debt maturity.
(2) An alternative which would largely eliminate the possibility of moral hazard would be to link payments to a regional equity index.

292

The Asian crisis: lessons for crisis management and prevention

high degree of corporate leverage, the dominance of local
bank financing and the currency and maturity mismatch of
this bank lending. The result was that risk was poorly
diversified and unduly concentrated on the country’s
banking system. There is no single optimal capital structure
for either corporations or governments. We cannot say, for
example, that local currency debt is always less risky than
foreign currency debt, or that fixed-rate debt is preferable to
variable-rate debt. Our discussion, however, illustrates the
importance of both the level and design of debt in allocating
risk.
Notice that changes in capital structure redistribute risk, and
can therefore mitigate the consequences of future wealth
losses. But the time to redistribute risk is before losing all
your wealth. The bankrupt gains little by resolving never to
go to the casino again. Once the losses have occurred, they
cannot be recovered by voluntary debt restructuring.
Voluntary restructuring can shift the time pattern of cash
flows and their risk; it cannot affect value. It is part of
crisis prevention; it has little role to play in crisis
resolution.

Policy implications
In this section we sketch some of the policy implications for
developing countries, most of which flow fairly directly
from our analysis of the issues. We begin with the role of
foreign capital.
Since a high proportion of foreign investment in developing
countries has been in the form of short-term debt, it has
provided little risk pooling and has led to substantial capital
outflows with an associated pressure on reserves. Policy,
therefore, needs to be aimed at increasing the proportion of
foreign capital that is in the form of foreign direct
investment or equity portfolio investment. In particular,
liberalisation of foreign direct investment or inward equity
portfolio investment needs to be undertaken in parallel with
that of short-term banking flows.
There are some encouraging indications that an increasing
proportion of foreign capital in emerging markets is of a
long-term nature. For example, foreign direct investment in
emerging markets has increased by 30% a year since 1990,
and by 1997 had reached nearly 50% of private capital
inflows to emerging markets (though it remained relatively
unimportant in South East Asia).(1) Foreign direct
investment depends partly on the absence of government
constraints that are often designed to protect particular local
industries, but it is also heavily dependent on a benign
political, legal and institutional infrastructure.
Since 1980 an increasing fraction of the indirect investment
in emerging markets has been securitised, with the result
that both equity and bond investment have grown at the

expense of bank lending. This has had two advantages.
While these portfolio flows have been more volatile than
direct investment, they are at least more stable than
short-term banking flows. Also, proportionately more of
the risk has been borne by foreigners and thereby pooled.
In some countries, the growth in foreign equity investment
has been hampered by direct restrictions on ownership.
For example, before May 1997 foreign equity investment
in Korea was inhibited by the fact that investors as a group
were not permitted to hold more than 20% of the shares
of any Korean firm.(2) But, even where there have been
no such formal constraints on foreign equity holdings,
investment has been restricted by the costs of accessing
overseas markets. There are various actions that may
help to cut these access costs. For example, trading costs
could be reduced by making it easier for firms to list on
overseas exchanges and by deregulating the domestic
exchanges. Other (and potentially much larger) costs
arise from the difficulties of acquiring information about
an overseas market and therefore depend, among other
things, on the quality of accounting data and the regulation
of trading activity. The growth of specialist country
funds suggests that investing through such funds may have
helped to economise on the costs of collecting
information.(3)
We have stressed the role of short-term bank loans in the
Asian crisis. Such short-term loans shift risk from the
lender to the borrower, who must take on the uncertainty
about the default premium when the loans are rolled over.
Therefore, contrary to some recent suggestions, the
regulatory authorities who are responsible for the solvency
of the lending banks have no reason to encourage them to
increase the maturity of their interbank loans. However, the
regulators for the borrowing banks do need to be concerned
about both the maturity and currency mismatch of the bank
portfolios. Moreover, the heavy sectoral concentration of
these loan portfolios and the very high leverage of many
corporate borrowers emphasise the need for much stronger
supervision of the lending practices of the local banks and
of the valuation of their loans.
While there are dangers in abrupt increases in competition,
there is a strong case in many developing economies for
reducing barriers to entry by foreign banks, which would
facilitate direct loans from these banks to corporates, rather
than by way of the interbank market. Such competition is
also likely to be the best antidote to uncommercial lending
practices by domestic banks.
Corporations in the crisis countries had not only expanded
productive capacity with little regard for prospective returns,
but they had financed this expansion largely by borrowing.
Thus a relatively small decline in economic activity led to
widespread defaults, the cost of which was borne by the
banking system. This suggests three further policy aims.

(1) As a result of the capital outflow in 1998 from crisis countries, direct investment rose in that year to 84% of net private flows to emerging markets
(Institute of International Finance, 1999a).
(2) This proportion was increased progressively to 50% in December 1997. Restrictions on foreign investment in long-term Korean corporate bonds
have been even more severe.
(3) Between 1990 and 1995 the number of US country funds increased about fivefold and the assets under management increased from $13 billion to
$109 billion (Serra (1999)). For evidence that country funds economise on information costs, see J A Frankel and S L Schmukler, (1997).

293

Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin: August 1999

The first is to promote greater use of equity finance.
Deregulation of the underwriting market can help to reduce
the costs of issuing equity, while the supply of equity
finance can be enhanced by encouraging foreign equity
ownership and by increasing domestic institutional
ownership.(1) The second policy aim should be to reduce the
cost of default by improved bankruptcy procedures. The
third is to reduce the probability of default by encouraging
more efficient hedging. In some cases efficient hedging
instruments already exist. For example, the development of
the swap market has provided borrowers with a low-cost
way to separate the currency of the loan from their exposure
to that currency. The problem therefore was not that the
means for hedging were absent, but that Asian corporations
and banks were confident that the currency pegs would be
maintained and were content to take on the risks of foreign
currency borrowing. But currency fluctuations are not the
only macro risks that threaten corporations and governments
in developing countries. Particularly for governments,
which are unable to issue equity explicitly, there is a clear
need for them to design debt structures that hedge against
the principal risks. There is much talk about involving the
private sector in crisis prevention.(2) The greatest potential
contribution of commercial and investment banks to crisis
prevention would be to devise and market efficient hedging
instruments to corporations and governments.

Conclusion
Underlying public policy towards international crises is the
view that markets are subject to a succession of contagious
bubbles and panics, which the authorities can, and should,
intervene to ameliorate. However, significant progress in
developing policy will be made only when it is recognised
that financial markets generally function well, and that
international financial institutions have neither the resources
nor the superior information to stem the wealth losses that
these crises cause. Thus the principal function of the IMF is
not to counteract supposed failures of financial markets by
acting as a lender of last resort, but instead the IMF should
use its ability to impose conditions that would be difficult
for private institutions to require.
There has been considerable concern that the primary
beneficiaries of IMF assistance are the major international
banks, which have been able to avoid the consequences of
their imprudent lending and have therefore little reason to be
any more prudent in the future. These concerns are almost

(1) This is frequently associated with the development of private pension schemes.
(2) See, for example, International Monetary Fund (1999) and Institute of International Finance (1999b).

294

certainly misplaced. International banking is a competitive
activity and there is no reason to suppose that the banks
have been able to appropriate to themselves the (very small)
subsidy in IMF loans. Nor does the yield and volatility of
developing country debt suggest that lenders regard that debt
as underwritten by the IMF. Moves to ‘bail in’ private
lenders by (say) a moratorium on debt service are likely to
be counterproductive, since they are likely to increase the
cost of private sector debt and induce banks to exit even
more rapidly.
The emphasis of public policy should be on crisis prevention
rather than resolution. The Asian crisis was prompted by
huge industrial overcapacity and increasing costs, which led
to a sharp fall in profitability. This crisis in the real
economy showed up in the financial sector in the form of
large capital outflows and considerable strains on the
domestic banking system. This suggests the need to develop
financial structures that can distribute risks in the real
economy more efficiently.
A large proportion of foreign capital was in the form of
short-term, foreign currency interbank loans. This capital
inflow was not only easily reversed, but the risks were
concentrated in the developing countries’ banking systems.
Where capital consisted of foreign direct investment or
equity portfolio investment, capital flows were much more
stable and the risk was efficiently pooled with foreign
investors.
Unlike equity, debt brings with it the risk of default. This
risk, however, is influenced by the structure of the debt. For
example, we noted how the risk of changes in the default
premium can be reduced by an extension in debt maturities,
and we showed how structured debt can be used to reduce
the risk of default. It is also undesirable that default risk
should be borne solely by domestic banks. The pool of
lenders can be widened, both by encouraging the entry of
foreign banks and by securitisation of corporate debt.
There are some encouraging signs that some of these
changes in financial structure have already been taking
place. For example, an increasing proportion of capital
inflows into emerging markets has been in the form of
foreign direct investment, and more of the indirect
investment has consisted of bond and equity investment
rather than bank loans. Nevertheless there are a number of
possible institutional reforms that could help to accelerate
these processes.

The Asian crisis: lessons for crisis management and prevention

References

Bagehot, W (1873), Lombard Street, London: Kegan Paul.
Banerjee, A V (1992), ‘A simple model of herding behavior’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol 107,
pages 797–818, August.
Calomiris, C W (1998), ‘The IMF’s Imprudent Role as Lender of Last Resort’, The Cato Journal, Vol 17, winter.
Diamond, D and Dybvig, P (1983), ‘Bank runs, liquidity, and deposit insurance’, Journal of Political Economy, Vol 91,
pages 401–19.
Dooley, M P (1996), ‘A survey of literature on controls over international capital transactions’, IMF Staff Papers, Vol 43,
pages 639–87, December.
Eichengreen, B, Mussa M et al (1998), ‘Capital account liberalization: theoretical and practical aspects’, IMF Occasional
Paper, No 172.
Fischer, S (1999), ‘On the need for an international lender of last resort’, International Monetary Fund, January.
Frankel, J A and Schmukler, S L (1997) ‘Country funds and asymmetric information’, Working Paper, Center for
International and Development Economics, University of California, Berkeley, May 1997.
Institute of International Finance (1999a), Capital Flows to Emerging Market Economies, Washington, DC, April.
Institute of International Finance (1999b), Involving the Private Sector in the Resolution of Financial Crises in Emerging
Markets, Washington, DC, 12 April.
International Monetary Fund (1998a), International Capital Markets: Developments, Prospects and Key Policy Issues,
Washington, DC, September.
International Monetary Fund (1998b), The World Economic Outlook: Financial Turbulence and the World Economy,
Washington, DC, October.
International Monetary Fund (1999), Involving the Private Sector in Forestalling and Resolving Financial Crises,
Washington, DC, March.
Jackson, K D (1999), ‘Introduction: the roots of the crisis’, in Jackson, K D (ed), Asian Contagion: The Causes and
Consequences of a Financial Crisis, Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press.
Kaufman, G (1994), ‘Bank contagion: a review of the theory and evidence’, Journal of Financial Services Research, Vol 8,
pages 123–50, April.
Lardy, N (1999), ‘China and the Asian financial contagion’, in Jackson, K D (ed), Asian Contagion: The Causes and
Consequences of a Financial Crisis, Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press.
Merton, R (1974), ‘On the pricing of corporate debt: the risk structure of interest rates’, Journal of Finance, Vol 29,
pages 449–70.
Meltzer, A H (1998) ‘Asian problems and the IMF’, The Cato Journal, Vol 17, winter.
Myers, S C (1998), ‘Financial architecture’, European Financial Management, Vol 5.
Radelet, S and Sachs, J ( 1998), ‘The East Asian financial crisis: diagnosis, remedies, prospects’, unpublished paper,
Harvard Institute for International Development, 20 April.
295

Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin: August 1999

Rajan, R G and Zingales, L (1998), ‘Which capitalism? lessons from the East Asian crisis’, unpublished paper, University
of Chicago, September.
Rubin, R E (1999), ‘Remarks on reform of the international financial architecture to the School of Advanced International
Studies’, 21 April.
Sachs, J (1995), ‘Do we need an international lender of last resort?’, Frank Graham Memorial Lecture, Princeton University.
Serra, A P (1999), ‘Tests of international capital market integration: evidence from emerging markets’, PhD dissertation,
London Business School.
Summers, L (1998) ‘Opportunities out of crises: lessons from Asia’, Remarks to the Overseas Development Council,
19 March.
Thornton, H (1802), An Enquiry into the Nature and Effects of Paper Credit of Great Britain, reprinted, New York: August
Kelley.
Welch, I (1992), ‘Sequential sales, learning and cascades’, Journal of Finance, Vol 47, pages 695–732, June.

296

