The Inflation Target five years on
Lecture delivered by
Mervyn King

At the London Schools of Economics
29 October 1997

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

THE INFLATION TARGET FIVE YEARS ON
MERVYN KING

Birthdays are always fun, and, “d’un certain age”, more so when they are other people’s.
Tonight we celebrate two birthdays. The first is the 10th birthday of the Financial Markets
Group here at LSE. Its aim, then as now, was to promote research into the link between
financial markets and the real economy. That is what central banks are about. When
Charles Goodhart and I talked to David Walker in 1986 about setting up such a group, none
of us envisaged the breadth and depth of the research which was to emerge over the
subsequent decade. Comparing the first Annual Report, which I wrote, with the latest Report,
it is clear that the FMG has never been in such good shape. Like most successful teams, its
strength has been its ability to find outstanding young players who have come through their
apprenticeship as research students and joined the first team as leading academics both in the
UK and abroad. This flowering of talent in the FMG is in large part due to the hard work and
leadership of David Webb over the past six years. Throughout that time David has been able
to rely on the guiding hand of Charles Goodhart, and a series of outstanding chairmen of the
Group’s Steering Committee: David Walker, without whom the Group could not have been
set up, Rupert Pennant-Rea and now Brian Quinn. The highly successful interaction between
the private sector sponsors and the public sector researchers has proved a model which,
prompted by the ESRC, has been followed by other groups.

Tonight, though, we celebrate another birthday. Five years ago this month the then
Chancellor, Norman Lamont, in the wake of our departure from the ERM, announced his
intention to introduce an inflation target. In the weeks immediately after our departure from
the ERM, Britain had a floating exchange rate and no nominal anchor for the price level. Such
an anchor was urgently needed. In October 1992, the Chancellor wrote to the Chairman of
the Treasury and Civil Service Committee setting out a new framework for monetary policy
consisting of two features. The first was an explicit inflation target. Initially this was a range
of 1%-4%, with the aim of bringing inflation down to within the lower part of the range by the
end of the Parliament. The second was a much greater degree of openness and transparency in
the conduct of monetary policy. And it is five years to this very day since substance was given
to this idea when Mr Lamont announced in his Mansion House speech that the Bank would be
asked to publish an independent Inflation Report in order “to make the formation of policy

2

more transparent and our decisions more accountable”. So the Inflation Report was launched
publicly five years ago tonight.

The further radical changes to the Bank of England and the monetary policy framework
announced by Gordon Brown in May this year draw a clear distinction between the
Chancellor’s responsibility for setting the inflation target and the responsibility of the Bank’s
new Monetary Policy Committee (or MPC for short) for ensuring that interest rates are set so
as to hit that target. In the jargon, this distinction is between goal independence and
instrument independence. The government sets the goal and the MPC sets the instrument.
That division of labour is embodied in the Bank of England Bill which was laid before
Parliament yesterday afternoon.

The inflation target remains firmly at the centre of the monetary framework. In his letter to
the Governor on 6 May, the Chancellor wrote that “the monetary policy objective of the Bank
of England will be to deliver price stability (as defined by the Government’s inflation
target)...”. The Chancellor subsequently set the inflation target at 2½% per cent as measured
by the increase in the RPI excluding mortgage interest payments over the previous twelve
months - known as RPIX inflation. The inflation target will be reviewed by the Chancellor
annually at the time of the Budget, although the presumption is that it will not be changed
during the present parliament.

The painful experience of the transition from the strict rules of the gold standard to the
discretionary management of inconvertible paper money - described by Marvin Goodfriend of
the Richmond Fed as a 20th century odyssey - has led to the modern consensus that price
stability is the overriding objective of monetary policy. An explicit recognition of that
consensus is the move in the 1990s towards formal inflation targets. Such targets were first
introduced as an anchor for monetary policy in New Zealand in March 1990 and in Canada in
February 1991. But it is over the past five years that the idea has not only been adopted more
widely, with some eight countries now basing their monetary policy on an explicit inflation
target, but has been seen as an alternative intellectual framework for monetary policy. There
are conferences on inflation targets. There has been an increase in the number of academic
papers on inflation targets. And it has become a popular recommendation by the IMF to
countries in need of advice. In fact, inflation targets have been all the rage in the 1990s and

3

they are as fashionable now as the idea of monetary policy credibility was in the 1980s. An
analysis of the number of articles published with the phrase “monetary policy credibility” in
their title shows an increase from four to forty-eight articles between the first and second half
of the 1980s A similar phenomenon has occurred with inflation targeting. Prior to 1992, only
thirteen academic articles had been published which included the phrase ‘inflation target(ing)’
in the title. Over the subsequent five years, that number increased to sixty-eight. 1

Why has the popularity of inflation targets spread, how do they work, will they survive, or is
this just a fad? In this lecture I shall try to answer six questions:

1

1

Is inflation targeting new?

2

What has been the experience of countries with inflation targets?

3

Does an inflation target mean that monetary policy ignores output?

4

What is the role of inflation forecasts?

5

Why is openness and transparency important?

6

How will the new Bank of England be accountable?

Is inflation targeting new?

Although inflation targets have been the fashion of the 1990s, the idea that policy should
explicitly target the price level has a long and respectable pedigree. Both Irving Fisher and
Maynard Keynes advocated targeting a price index, and in the 1930s, following the earlier
writings of Wicksell, Sweden adopted a price target thus avoiding the worst of the depression
when the Gold Standard collapsed.

The benefits of price stability - the avoidance of both inflation and deflation - have long been
well understood, if overlooked for much of the post-war period. Inflation targets have the
great advantage of focusing attention on the objective which monetary policy can achieve in
the long run, namely price stability. The benefit of increasing the transparency of monetary
policy is an issue to which I shall return later. But, in a deeper sense, an inflation target is no
more than a way of restating the fact that any monetary policy faces two tasks. The first, and
overriding, objective is to hit the desired level of inflation in the medium to long run. The
1

Based on citations in the Journal of Economic Literature.

4

second is to avoid damaging fluctuations to output and employment - the “boom and bust”
syndrome - by adjusting interest rates in the face of unexpected shocks to the economy.

It is possible to show rigorously, within the context of a simple model of aggregate demand
and supply, that any monetary policy can be expressed as a “monetary policy reaction
function” that describes policy in terms of two variables .2 The first is an ex ante inflation
target defined as the value of the inflation rate which the central bank would like to achieve in
the absence of any shock to the economy. The second is the discretionary response by the
central bank to the observed shock. In this sense, an inflation target is not a particular way of
setting monetary policy; rather, it should be seen as an generic form encompassing different
monetary policy regimes as special limiting cases.

To see this, compare an inflation targeting regime with a regime based on monetary targeting.
Both regimes incorporate an inflation target (either implicitly or explicitly) as the ultimate
objective of policy. And, given the transmission lags in monetary policy, both rely on a
forward-looking assessment when responding to shocks. The difference between the two
regimes rests on the weights assigned to different information variables when forming that
assessment. An inflation targeting regime exploits the widest set of information variables
possible - the policymaker optimally weights together any variable that helps to predict
inflation in the future. In contrast, the policymaker in a (pure) monetary targeting regime
considers only money and ignores the potential information contained in non-monetary
variables. In this sense, monetary targeting is simply a limiting case of inflation targeting in
which the policymaker assigns a weight of unity to money and of zero to all other variables.

Put another way, in a world in which the velocity of money was entirely predictable and there
was a one-to-one mapping between the growth of money and inflation, the inflation target
regime would collapse to that of monetary targeting. Unfortunately, we do not live in such a
world, we never have, and, nor are we ever likely to. Inflation targeting allows the
discretionary use of information other than money when velocity is unpredictable. For that
reason, I think inflation targeting is here to stay.

2

Such a model is discussed in King, M (1996) “How Should Central Banks Reduce Inflation? Conceptual Issues” in Achieving Price Stability, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

5

2

What has been the experience of countries with inflation targets?

Figure 1 plots the path of UK inflation since the second world war, and shows the different
monetary policy regimes in place during this period. It is a sad reflection of the transparency
of monetary policy during much of this period that the dating of policy regimes is somewhat
imprecise. Indeed, there are periods, notably in the 1970s, and the late 1980s, in which the
nominal anchor was not at all clear. These problems highlight the importance of a clear and
transparent framework for monetary policy. The large increases in inflation in the 1970s and,
to a lesser extent, in the late 1980s both occurred in periods in which the framework for
monetary policy was, at best, opaque. Conversely, the introduction of clear and transparent
monetary regimes, be it monetary targeting, the ERM or direct inflation targeting, have often
coincided with sustained falls in inflation. It is not possible to distinguish between cause and
effect here, but the experience is suggestive of the benefits of a clear nominal anchor. Some
anchors, however, are more effective than others.

In the five years since the inflation target was introduced, the annual rate of inflation in Britain
has averaged 2.8% a year. Over the same period, the annual growth rate of GDP averaged
2.9%. To a large extent, that reflects a cyclical recovery. Nevertheless, the last sustained
period in which GDP growth exceeded inflation was in the first half of the 1960s. A fifth
birthday is clearly far too early to judge the likely long-term success of the new approach.
What is clear, however, is that the birth of the inflation target coincided with one of the most
successful episodes of the UK’s post-war economic performance.

A similar story can be told from the experience of other inflation targeting countries. Table 1
looks at average inflation among a set of inflation targeting countries in the periods before and
after the introduction of the targets in each country.3 In nearly all cases, inflation has more
than halved in comparison with the preceding decade. Indeed, the level of inflation in these
countries now compares favourably with that in non-inflation-targeting countries. Again it is
important not to confuse correlation with causation - the 1990s have seen a global disinflation.
But it is encouraging that, as Table 2 indicates, this reduction in inflation has not come at the

3

The two inflation targeting countries omitted from Tables 1 and 2 are Israel - where comparisons over
time are dominated by its recovery from hyperinflation - and Spain - which only introduced its inflation target
at the end of 1994.

6

expense of either average output growth or, as some commentators feared, greater variability
in output. Indeed, in a period in which average output growth in the rest of the G7 has fallen
in every country except Germany, the average rate of growth in inflation targeting countries
has increased from a little over 2% to nearly 3% while the variance of GDP has more than
halved. Again, cyclical effects explain part of these changes. But the inflation target countries
have experienced a recovery in output without loosing control over inflation.

3

Does an inflation target ignore output?

A common charge against the use of an inflation target is that it ignores output. An inflation
target, the critics would argue, is not enough. But, as the saying goes, it all depends on what
you mean by an inflation target.

There are two dimensions to this question - long-run and short-run. If one believes that, in the
long-run, there is no trade-off between inflation and output then there is no point in using
monetary policy to target output. Most central banks believe - and there is growing evidence
to support this view - that low inflation is, if anything, more conducive to productivity growth
than high inflation. But you do not have to accept this proposition, only the view that printing
money cannot raise long-run productivity growth, in order to believe that inflation rather than
output is the only sensible objective of monetary policy in the long-run.4

The interesting dimension of the question is in the short-run. And it is here that the critics do
have a point. I argued earlier that any monetary policy can be described in terms in two policy
variables - a medium-term inflation target and a response of interest rates to shocks that create
fluctuations in inflation and output. The overriding objective of monetary policy is to ensure
that on average inflation is equal to the target. But such a target is not sufficient to define
policy. There is a subordinate decision on how to respond to shocks as they occur.

As is well known, the significance of that discretion depends on the nature of the shocks
hitting the economy. Where such shocks take the form of unexpected increases or decreases
4

The cost-benefit analysis of low inflation is not discussed here - see King, M.A (1996), “Monetary
Stability: Rhyme or Reason”, Economic and Social Research Council Seventh Annual Lecture, and
Bakhshi, H., A.G.Haldane and N.Hatch (1997), “Quantifying some Benefits of Price Stability, Bank of
England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol 37, 3, 274-284.

7

in demand, they tend to lead to output and inflation rising or falling together. These shocks
pose no dilemma for the MPC. There is, of course, a difficult technical problem of identifying
such shocks but the way in which policy should respond is in principle clear. But there are
other types of shock - usually captured by the portmanteau description “supply shocks” which tend to shift output and inflation in opposite directions. Sometimes these are the results
of government policy at home - changes in indirect taxes for example - or in policy overseas resulting in movements in the exchange rate. On other occasions, such shocks reflect
unexpected developments in the world economy.

Faced with supply shocks, central banks have a choice. They can either try to bring inflation
back to the target level as soon as possible, possibly exacerbating the initial impact of the
shock on output. Or they can accommodate the inflationary consequences of the supply shock
in the short-run, bringing inflation back to the target level more slowly and reducing the
impact on output. Hence, in the short-run, there is a trade-off between inflation and output.
And the choice between these two means that there is a permanent trade-off between the
volatility of inflation, on the one hand, and the volatility of output, on the other. A strategy of
returning inflation to its target as rapidly as possible leads to lower inflation volatility and
higher output volatility than a strategy of bringing inflation back to target over a longer
horizon.

The trade-off between output volatility and inflation volatility has been popularised by the
work of Taylor5 Studies typically find evidence of a fairly malign trade-off, with very short or
very long targeting horizons delivering extreme outcomes. This type of trade-off is illustrated
by the curve AA - the “Taylor curve” - in figure 2. Moving up the curve is equivalent to
lengthening the implicit targeting horizon (reducing the speed of disinflation following a
shock), thereby lowering output variability.

Confronted with a trade-off between the volatility of inflation and the volatility of output, how
should policymakers respond? That depends upon the relative costs of inflation volatility, on
the one hand, and output volatility, on the other. To determine the optimal targeting horizon
it is necessary to confront the menu of output/inflation variability choices described by the

5

See Taylor, J.B. (1983), Macroeconomic Policy in the World Economy: From Econometric Design to
Practical Operations, W.W. Norton and Company, New York.

8

trade-off curve AA with the authorities’ preferences over output/inflation variability. These
preferences are embodied in curves such as BB which show combinations of output and
inflation variability which result in the same cost to the central bank. The optimal targeting
horizon is given by the point D, where the cost is lowest, that is where the two curves, AA
and BB, are tangents.

In theory, once a central bank has decided how to react to a shock, interest rates or money
growth are adjusted to respond to the shock while remaining consistent with meeting the
inflation target in the medium-term. The behaviour of the central bank can be described as a
monetary policy reaction function, while others talk in terms of “feedback rules”, such as the
well-known Taylor rule.

Figure 2 highlights two important points concerning the targeting horizon. First, the optimal
targeting horizon depends critically on the rate at which the central bank is prepared to accept
more variability in inflation to reduce variability of output. Second, the optimal targeting
horizon is likely to vary depending on the nature and persistence of shocks. In terms of
figure 2, different types of shock will be associated with difference output/inflation variability
curves. Simple rules such as the Taylor rule which set interest rates according to deviations of
output and inflation from their desired levels do not distinguish between shocks.

Many supply shocks are price level effects. For example, changes in indirect taxes or
commodity prices often affect the domestic price level but do not in themselves change the
underlying rate of inflation. An appropriate monetary response is to accommodate the first
round price level effect, while ensuring that changes in the published twelve month inflation
rate do not alter inflation expectations and lead to second round inflationary or deflationary
changes in wages and prices. Price level effects of this kind remain in the official inflation rate
for at least a year. That is because the measure of inflation for the target is the increase in
prices over the previous twelve months. Since shocks may take several months to have their
full effect, a horizon of about two years is a reasonable one over which to try to bring inflation
back to its target. But if shocks are sufficiently large - in either direction - then it may be
sensible to extend the horizon over which inflation returns to its target level. Indeed, one of
the main purposes of the open letters which, under the new arrangements, the Bank will be
required to send to the Chancellor should inflation deviate by more than one percentage point

9

from its target, is to explain, as the Chancellor wrote to the Governor on 12 June, “the reasons
why inflation has moved away from the target ... and the period within which you [the MPC]
would expect inflation to return to the target”.

It is striking that central banks have been reluctant to acknowledge openly that monetary
policy has two components, an inflation target and a response to shocks. Provided an inflation
target framework is interpreted to include these two distinct elements of monetary policy, then
the charge of the critics that inflation targets mean ignoring output is false. Moreover, by
allowing the horizon over which inflation is brought back to its target level to depend upon the
nature and size of the shocks hitting the economy such a policy reaction is superior in principle
to either rigid monetary targets or rigid nominal demand or GDP targets. Of course, the
advocates of monetary targets or nominal demand or GDP targets would not advocate that
they be used rigidly. Equally, however, the advantages of those other targets in terms of
maintaining stability in the growth of nominal demand can certainly be achieved by inflation
targets.

There is one final and very important caveat. Despite my description of an optimal monetary
policy reaction function, it is important for any central bank to realise the limitations to its
ability to engage in counter-cyclical policy. Inadequacies of data, policy lags between changes
in interest rates and their effect on inflation, and, most important of all, inadequate knowledge
of how the economy behaves, all mean that it is impossible to fine tune the economy. As
Milton Friedman pointed out in 1968, the “most important lesson that history teaches about
what monetary policy can do - and it is a lesson of the most profound importance - is that
monetary policy can prevent money itself from being a major source of uncertainty”.6 The
Monetary Policy Committee is under no illusion that it can abolish the business cycle. Over a
number of years, monetary policy can ensure that inflation averages the target of 2½%. But it
cannot fine tune output, and it would be a mistake try to do so. If we can avoid the more
extreme fluctuations of output that we have seen in the past then monetary policy would have
made a major contributions to stability in Britain.

6

1-17

Friedman, M (1968), “The Role of Monetary Policy”, American Economic Review, Vol LVIII, No.1,

10

4

What is the role of inflation forecasts?

Because of the infamous long and variable lags between changes in monetary policy and their
effects on inflation, policy must be forward looking. That requires the use of a forecast. An
inflation target does not mean setting policy according to the current rate of inflation. Rather
the MPC responds to movements in expected inflation. To raise interest rates only after
inflation itself had started to rise would usually be too late to prevent a further rise in inflation,
and would lead to instability in both inflation and output.

But, more than any other aspect of the discipline, forecasting brings economics into disrepute.
The main reason for that is that forecasts are too often presented as a single number - as point
forecasts. And prizes are awarded to those whose forecasts turn out to be correct in a single
year rather than close to the outturn over a number of years. Indeed, some newspapers give
golden guru awards on an annual basis. This is rather like awarding the Fields Medal for
mathematics to the winner of the National Lottery for their understanding of number theory.

It is possible to conceal the fact that policy must be based on a forecast by relying on
intermediate target variables that have a relatively stable relationship with inflation, but there
would be little point in using such an approach unless the intermediate variable was itself a
reasonable forecast of future inflation. So in the Bank we have come to the view that it is
better to be explicit about the forecast that underlies policy decisions than to conceal the
forecasting judgement in a form of words that requires careful deconstruction by professional
Bank Watchers. And such a forecast cannot be a single number. It must be presented for
what it is, namely a probability distribution. Since February 1996, the Bank has published a
probability distribution of inflation in the Inflation Report in the form of a fan chart. Figure 3
shows the fan chart from the August Inflation Report. The chart shows the relative likelihood
of possible outcomes. The central band, coloured deep red, includes the most likely outcome
and is chosen to be the narrowest band that contains 10% of the distribution: there is a 10%
probability that inflation will be within that central band at any date. The next deepest shade,
on both sides of the central band, takes the distribution out to 20%; and so on, in steps of ten
percentage points. The more uncertainty there is about the inflation outcome at any particular
time horizon, the wider the bands, and the more gradually the colour fades. And if the risks
are more on one side than the other, then the bands will be wider on that side of the central

11

band. It looks, and is, rather like a conventional contour map.

The process by which the forecast is constructed is a lengthy one. It involves all the members
of the MPC discussing and agreeing a set of assumptions on the basis of which the forecast is
constructed. That involves discussions not only of the exogenous assumptions (about world
trade for example), but also about the shocks that have occurred and monetary transmission
mechanism. As a result, the forecast published in the Inflation Report is agreed by the MPC.
If some members of the MPC were to disagree with the forecast, then the dissenting minority
would be entitled to insert an alternative forecast into the Inflation Report.

The publication of the inflation fan chart is one of the Bank’s contributions to the analysis of
monetary policy in recent years. And we are considering publishing fan charts for output as
well as inflation in future Inflation Reports. A fan chart emphasises that, as in other areas of
public policy, decisions should be based on probabilities. In other words, policy should reflect
the balance of risks.

What role do the fan charts play in the setting of interest rates? For a given profile of interest
rates, they show the most likely outcome for inflation over the next two years or so and the
risks around that central view. Since policy is a question of balancing risks, they summarise
the information relevant to the MPC’s decision of whether or not to change interest rates. But
it does not provide a mechanical guide to policy. There are two difficulties in mapping directly
from the fan chart to a decision on interest rates.

First, the appropriate response to supply shocks is to bring inflation back to its target level
over a horizon that may, in principle, depend on the size and nature of the shock. For many
purposes, a horizon of two years is a reasonable period within which to bring inflation back to
target. But there may be circumstances, as I discussed earlier, where such an horizon would
be inappropriate - if the shock was sufficiently large for example. If the profile for inflation
were rising or falling at the two-year forecasting horizon, then the optimal level of interest
rates would depend on the horizon over which it was felt appropriate to bring inflation back to
the target level.

12

Second, when there is uncertainty about the impact of an interest rate change on the economy
then, as Bill Brainard showed thirty years ago, it may be sensible to move cautiously to the
level of interest rates that would be necessary to equate expected inflation over the appropriate
horizon with the target level, rather than move rates abruptly and so risk injecting volatility
into the economy.7 We do not know how significant this “Brainard uncertainty” is, but in
practice central banks often move cautiously. Whether this is fully justified by the existence of
such uncertainty, or is the product of excessive caution is a subject that merits further
research. But it should be clear that, although the forecast provides a basis for decisions, it
cannot be used mechanically. In the jargon of economists, the optimal policy reaction function
cannot be defined simply over the expected inflation rate irrespective of the shocks hitting the
economy.

The forecast provides a basis for making and explaining decisions. But its value lies mainly in
raising questions, in a systematic manner, about where policy might go wrong. As
Sir Samuel Brittan has pointed out, a debate between rival forecasts “is likely to be barren.
Even more barren would be an attempt to argue about demand components, eg whether
investment would rise by 5% or 10%”.8 So the MPC have no ambition to be gurus, golden or
otherwise, merely competent economists working together to assess the balance of risks to the
inflation target.

5

What is the role of transparency?

An inflation target framework is more than a medium-term target for inflation. As I argued
earlier, it must include also a strategy for reacting to economic shocks. In that sense, it does
not represent a radical departure from other monetary frameworks. But perhaps the most
important distinguishing characteristic of inflation target regimes is the emphasis they place on
transparency and accountability. Let me start with transparency.

7

Brainard, W. (1967), “Uncertainty and the Effectiveness of Policy”, American Economic Review, 57,
pp411-25
8

Brittan, S. “Memorandum of accountability of the Bank of England”, submitted to the Treasury Select
Committee, August 1997.

13

Paper money creates the temptation for governments to spring inflation surprises on an
unsuspecting public as a hidden form of taxation. This “time inconsistency” problem for
monetary authorities has led to a search for credible monetary frameworks. The most popular
among academics is a monetary rule that would bind the authorities to create money according
to a predetermined criterion consistent with long-run price stability. Unfortunately, no such
simple - or for that matter complicated - rule exists. Our understanding of the economy is
inadequate. Any proposed rule would soon be made redundant by the results of new research.
No sooner would the authorities have adopted a rule than improvements to the rule would
appear. Knowledge increases over time, and it would be intellectual pig-headedness to stay
with a sub-optimal rule. For any rule to be feasible, there would have to be a rule for updating
the rule itself. And I suppose that one could go further and argue that we would need a rule
to update the rule that was used to update the rule itself, and so on.

But if simple rules are infeasible, we should not accept that the only alternative is the use of
unfettered discretion by central bankers operating in secret. Rule-like behaviour is an
advantage in monetary policy. It introduces predictability, and helps to ensure that
expectations are consistent with the objective of price stability, thus lowering the cost of
achieving the inflation target. A more predictable monetary policy - not in the sense of stable
interest rates, but rather a predictable reaction of interest rates to developments in the
economy - reduces the “noise” injected into the system by policy itself. As Friedman pointed
out in the earlier quotation, monetary policy should avoid exacerbating fluctuations of output
and employment by introducing unnecessary uncertainty. An explicit inflation target has the
aim of reassuring economic agents that the Bank’s MPC will not allow money to increase at a
rate that allows inflation to exceed the target on average over a number of years, and also that
the MPC cannot pursue its own views about where inflation should be in the long run. An
inflation target means that the central bank operates with “constrained discretion”, in the
words of Bernanke and Mishkin (1997), rather than unfettered discretion.9

A transparent monetary policy implies that announcements of changes in interest rates by the
MPC might come as rather little surprise. The news would not be in the outcome of the
meetings of the MPC, but in the economics statistics published during the month. Markets

9

Bernanke, B.S and F.S Mishkin (1997), “Inflation Targeting: A New Framework for Monetary
Policy?”, NBER Working Paper, No.5893, mimes

14

would be able to anticipate the likely reaction of the MPC, and the decisions by the MPC
would follow a predictable policy reaction function. In contrast, an opaque monetary policy
means that the news is the outcome of the deliberations of the MPC and not developments in
the economy. In the extreme case, when monetary policy decisions were random, news about
the economy would have rather little impact on short-term market interest rates and more of
the news would come from the monetary meeting itself. It is of course tempting for central
banks to make their own meetings the main story. But transparency should lead to policy
being predictable. It is all part of the view that a successful central bank should be boring, a
referee whose success is judged by how little his decisions intrude into the game itself.

Some recent work by Andrew Haldane and Victoria Read at the Bank of England suggests
that there is some evidence that boredom is starting to set in.10 They examined the extent to
which forward market interest rates at different points of the yield curve jumped in response to
changes in official interest rates. In the limiting case of perfect transparency in which the
authorities’ reaction function is known with complete certainty, market rates would not
respond to changes in official interest rates. There would be no news in official interest rate
announcements.

Over the sample period January 1985 to March 1997, Haldane and Read found that changes in
forward interest rates along the entire yield curve were systematically related to changes in
official interest rates. But the average response of market rates to changes in official interest
rates has fallen significantly since 1992. The introduction of the inflation targeting framework
appears to have made British monetary policy less exciting - and a good thing too.

6

How will the new Bank be accountable?

Transparency is desirable because it improves the predictability of monetary policy by reducing
unnecessary uncertainty through the injection of policy “noise” into the economy.
Transparency is the degree of openness of the central bank’s explanation of its policies to the
public. The effectiveness of actions taken by an independent central bank can be enhanced by

10

Mimeo.

Haldane, A.G and Read, V. (1997), “Central Bank Secrecy and the Yield Curve”, Bank of England

15

transparency.

Independence and accountability go hand in hand. They are opposite sides of the same coin.
It concerns the ability of the public to hold the central bank to account for its actions. An
effective system of accountability is essential in order to give legitimacy to an independent
central bank with delegated powers to set interest rates. Accountability is the precondition for
independence in a democratic society.

At first sight, accountability might seem straightforward. But it raises the question of “to
whom” the Bank is accountable and “for what”. The Bank is accountable to the Chancellor of
the Exchequer for implementing his inflation target, to Parliament through the Treasury Select
Committee (TSC), to the Court of the Bank for the proper conduct of the MPC and, more
widely, to the public at large. There are now five ways in which the Bank is accountable:

(i)

The decisions of the MPC itself are announced immediately following the monthly

meeting at 12 noon on a Thursday. The minutes of those meetings are published on the
Wednesday following the subsequent meeting - approximately five weeks later. These minutes
contain not only an account of the discussion of the MPC, and the issues which it thought
important for its decisions, but also a record of the voting of each MPC member.

(ii)

The Inflation Report will continue, and may well form the basis for accountability to

Parliament. The original objective of the Inflation Report was, it is fair to say, to act as a
disciplining device on Government. The Bank’s report would set out its views of the likely
implications for inflation of decisions taken (or not taken) by the Chancellor. Now that the
power to set interest rates has been delegated to the MPC, the Inflation Report plays a rather
different role. It is now an instrument of accountability. It is one of the principal ways in
which the explanations of the MPC can be assessed and subject to scrutiny by outside
commentators.

(iii)

Appearances before the Treasury Select Committee by one or more members of the

MPC will be more frequent than hitherto. It will be natural for the MPC to be asked to appear
before the TSC following each Inflation Report, as suggested by the Chancellor. Hitherto, the
Bank has typically appeared before the TSC twice a year following the Budget and the

16

Summer Forecast. The rationale for this was not entirely clear. The Bank had no
responsibility for either the Budget or the Treasury forecast, and there was a danger of such
appearances providing an opportunity for Committee members to focus on alleged differences
between the Bank and Treasury. Now it is possible for TSC to hold the Bank to account for
its own actions. That should greatly improve both the accountability of the Bank and the
focus of TSC hearings. The TSC has been considering how it will fulfil its new role, and their
report on this was published this morning.

(iv)

The MPC is required to send an open letter to the Chancellor if inflation is more than

1% on either side of the target of 2½%. Given past experience of inflation volatility, it is
likely, even allowing for the change in policy regime, that the MPC will have many
opportunities to restore the lost art of letter writing to British life. And it is important to stress
that avoiding the need to write such a letter is not the objective of monetary policy. The
inflation target is not a range of 1½% to 3½%, it is a target of 2½% on average. Indeed, one
of the main purposes of the open letters is to explain the horizon over which the MPC intends
to bring inflation back to target if it starts more than 1 percentage point away from the target.
In other words, the MPC will be forced to reveal in public its proposed reaction to large
shocks.

(v)

Finally, the MPC is accountable to the Court of the Bank for the procedures it adopts

and the proper conduct of its business. The 16 non-Executive members of the reconstituted
Court will be required to report annually to Parliament on the conduct of the Committee, and
the Bank’s Annual Report will be debated in Parliament.

How these forms of accountability will work in practice is at this stage hard to say. Doubtless
we shall learn a good deal as we go along. But if any of you were in any doubt as to how
monetary policy could possibly be a full-time job, let me assure you that these provisions for
accountability will take up any time remaining from our activity of analysing the economy and
making decisions on interest rates.

The complexity of the “to whom” part of accountability surely contrasts with the simplicity of
“for what”. The inflation target is 2½%, and, at first sight, it might seem easy to compare the
outturn for inflation with the target. In practice, however, matters are less simple for two, by

17

now familiar, reasons. First, unpredictable shocks affecting both inflation and output mean
that inflation will deviate from the Bank’s central projection. Second, long lags between
changes in interest rates and their effect on inflation mean that it takes time to offset the effects
of such shocks. Taken together, those two reasons imply that, looking backwards, over a
short period, or even over a few years, it would be impossible for the MPC to hold inflation at
exactly 2½%. Moreover, if those shocks are supply shocks, which raise inflation while
depressing output, it might be undesirable to attempt to keep inflation at 2½%. So the test is
whether inflation averages 2½% over a number of years. But it is unlikely that the public, or at
least the TSC, will wish to wait that long. And, looking forward, the combination of
uncertainty and policy lags means that it is rarely possible to say that a decision was clearly
right or wrong.

So there is a need to devise a form of accountability which goes beyond the simple comparison
of outturn and target. One possibility is to compare the distribution of inflation outturns with
the Bank’s ex-ante probability distribution for inflation. But that changes each quarter. A
more promising avenue is to require the MPC to explain its actions and the reasons underlying
them clearly and openly to outside scrutiny. In that way, the explanations of why inflation
deviated from target can be assessed by outside commentators and a judgement made about
the quality of the MPC’s decisions.

That demonstrates one further advantage of an explicit inflation target. Central bank councils
which operate without an explicit target given to them by government are subject to
speculation about which members are “hawks” and which are “doves” on inflation. For the
new MPC such speculation is beside the point. Each member has been appointed to achieve
the inflation target of 2½%. Of course, there are differences of views and emphasis on the
monetary transmission mechanism, but we are all striving to achieve the same inflation target.

Conclusions
The guiding principle of monetary policy is to look ahead and act early. If interest rates are
left unchanged until inflation itself starts to rise or fall, then it will be too late to prevent
swings in both inflation and output that will be damaging to our economic performance. The
experience of the twentieth century has shown that there are many opportunities and

18

temptations for discretionary monetary policy to create inflation. Simple, or for that matter,
complicated, rules for setting interest rates do not exist. They would be undermined by new
research on better and improved rules which got rid of the bugs in the first rule as frequently
as software packages are released. Taylor rule 1.0 would quickly become Taylor 1.1,
followed by Taylor 2.0 and I think we have probably already reached Taylor 6.0.

Inflation targets are a practical response to the fact that knowledge increases over time. They
are a form of “constrained discretion”. Although inflation is assuredly a monetary
phenomenon in the medium term, to restrict one’s attention only to the money numbers would
be to throw away a great deal of important information in other indicators. Equally, it is
important to listen to a variety of views. One of the contributions of the new Monetary Policy
Committee is to provide a forum in which ideas and information can be pooled. This is the
optimal response to decision making under uncertainty in a world in which no one individual
has a monopoly of wisdom nor of information. And the new MPC has led to a sea change in
our discussions on inflation. Now that the buck stops with the MPC, and it has, in that
popular expression, to make “hard choices”, there is a seriousness of discussion that was not
always present before.

But if the MPC adds to the quality of decision-making, there is also an additional requirement
for transparency and accountability. That is crucial to the democratic legitimacy of an
independent central bank. The distinction between goal independence - in which the central
bank chooses both the target and the instrument - and instrument independence - in which the
central bank sets interest rates and the elected governments sets the target - is an important
feature of our system, and is embodied in the Bank of England Bill. And since the inflation
target is set by government, there is little point in speculating about the identity of “hawks”
and “doves” on the MPC. Each member has been appointed to hit the government’s inflation
target.

The inflation target and the Inflation Report represent successful innovations in the way
central banks operate in the 1990s. The UK has been very much at the forefront of these
developments. To borrow a phrase from a recent political speech, “The Bank of England may
not be the biggest central bank in the world, nor any longer the mightiest, but it can be the
best”. That is certainly a target at which we should aim.

Summary

This month is the fifth anniversary of the inflation target and today is the fifth birthday
of the announcement that the Bank of England would publish an independent Inflation
Report. Five years on it is the Bank itself that is independent in monetary policy, and
the Bill establishing that was introduced into the House yesterday. This morning the
Treasury Select Committee published its Report on accountability of the Monetary
Policy Committee.

In this lecture at the London School of Economics to celebrate the fifth anniversary of
the inflation target, Mervyn King, executive director of the Bank of England, answers
six questions:

Is inflation targeting new?
What has been the experience of countries with inflation targets?
Does an inflation target mean that monetary policy ignores output?
What is the role of inflation forecasts?
Why is openness and transparency important?
How will the new Bank of England be accountable?

In answering these questions, Mervyn King argues that:

Although inflation targets have been the monetary policy fashion of the 1990s, the
basic idea is an old one. Inflation targeting encompasses different monetary regimes as
limiting cases. As a result, it is likely that inflation targeting is here to stay.

Although it is too soon to judge the success of the inflation target, its introduction has
coincided with one of the most successful episodes of the UK’s post-war economic
performance.

The charge that inflation targeting ignores output is false. By varying the horizon over
which inflation is brought back to its target level, inflation targeting is superior in
principle to other monetary regimes such as monetary or nominal income targeting.

The Monetary Policy Committee is under no illusion that it can abolish the business
cycle. Over a number of years, monetary policy can ensure that inflation averages a
level around a target of 2½%. But it cannot fine tune output, and it would be a
mistake try to do so. If we can avoid the more extreme fluctuations of output that we
have seen in the past then monetary policy would have made a major contribution to
stability in Britain.

The forecast published in the Inflation Report is agreed by the MPC. If some members
of the MPC were to disagree with the forecast, then the dissenting minority would be
entitled to insert an alternative forecast into the Inflation Report.

Monetary policy must be forward looking, that requires the use of forecasts. But
forecasts should be presented as a probability distribution - as in the fan chart published
in the Inflation Report - not as a single number.

Transparency and accountability are crucial to the democratic legitimacy of an
independent central bank.

Since the inflation target is set by government, there is little point in speculating about
the identity of “hawks” and “doves” on the MPC. Each member has been appointed to
hit the government’s inflation target.

Mervyn King concludes that “The inflation target and the Inflation Report represent
successful innovations in the way central banks operate in the 1990s. The UK has been
very much at the forefront of these developments. To borrow a phrase from a recent
political speech, ‘The Bank of England may not be the biggest central bank in the
world, nor any longer the mightiest, but it can be the best’. It is at least something to
aim for.”

Figure 1: Annual UK inflation 1946-1997*
30.0
Fixed Exchange Rates

Money
Targets

ERM Inflation

Targets

25.0

20.0

percent

15.0

10.0

5.0

0.0
1946

1950

1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

-5.0
* Inflation is measured as the annual increase in the retail price index from 1946-1974, and in the retail price index excluding
mortgage interest payments from 1974-1997.

Figure 2: The Taylor Curve
A

Inflation
Variability

B

D

A
B
0
Output
Variability

Figure 3: August Inflation Report Forecast
Increase in prices on a year earlier
6

6

5

5

4

4

3

3

2

2

1

1

0

0
1992

93

94

95

96

97

98

99

TABLE 1:

AVERAGE INFLATION PERFORMANCE IN
INFLATION TARGETING AND NON-INFLATION
TARGETING COUNTRIES

Decade Preceding
Inflation Target
Average Rate
of Inflation
Australia
Canada
Finland
Sweden
New Zealand
UK
Average

Variance

Period Following
Inflation Target*
Average Rate
of Inflation

Variance

6.2
5.8
5.2
6.6
11.6
5.2

8.41
7.90
3.37
6.65
25.70
2.21

2.7
2.0
1.1
2.3
2.5
2.8

1.71
2.51
0.51
2.29
2.70
0.09

6.8

9.0

2.2

1.6

1980s
Average Rate
of Inflation

1990s

Variance

Average Rate
of Inflation

Variance

France
Germany
Italy
Japan
US

7.4
2.9
11.3
2.5
5.6

18.86
4.69
35.85
5.14
12.52

2.3
3.1
5.2
1.4
3.4

0.56
2.01
0.94
1.67
1.13

Average

5.9

15.4

3.1

1.3

*

Inflation Targets were introduced in: Canada in February 1991, Finland in March 1993, Sweden in February 1993,
New Zealand in March 1990, and UK in October 1992. The date of the introduction of the inflation target in
Australia is not altogether clear. It is taken here to be April 1993.

TABLE 2:

AVERAGE GDP GROWTH IN INFLATION TARGETING
AND NON-INFLATION TARGETING COUNTRIES

Decade Preceding
Inflation Target
Average Rate
of GDP Growth

Variance

Period Following
Inflation Target*
Average Rate
of GDP Growth

Variance

Australia
Canada
Finland
Sweden
New Zealand
UK

3.2
2.8
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.4

10.18
9.99
17.33
4.73
6.95
5.76

4.2
1.9
3.2
1.9
2.4
3.0

0.96
3.09
6.49
5.09
7.78
1.04

Average

2.2

9.2

2.8

4.1

1980s

1990s

Average Rate
of GDP Growth

Average Rate
of GDP Growth

Variance

Variance

France
Germany
Italy
Japan
US

2.3
1.8
2.4
3.8
2.8

1.95
3.18
2.52
1.49
6.91

1.4
2.1
1.2
2.2
2.1

2.33
4.67
2.11
3.79
2.30

Average

2.6

3.2

1.8

3.0

*

See Table 1 for details of when inflation targets were introduced in each country.

