Bank of England

Mark Carney, Governor - Speech
24th October 2013

Page 2
Mark Carney, Governor Speech - 24-10-13

Lionel Barber,
Editor Financial Times:

Good evening. It's my great pleasure to introduce our guest
speaker Mark Carney, the Governor of the Bank of England.
Mr Carney as you know is also Chairman of the Monetary
Policy Committee, the Financial Policy Committee and the
Board of the Prudential Regulation Authority. And in case you
were wondering what he actually does in his spare time, he's
Chairman of the Financial Stability Board, which coordinates
financial regulations worldwide.
Mr Carney is a native Canadian, born in Fort Smith,
Northwest Territories. He received a Bachelor's Degree in
Economics from Harvard and completed a Masters and
Doctorate in Economics from Oxford. Sadly, he did not make
the obvious next move in his career and join Ed Balls,
Stephanie Flanders and other distinguished members of the
economics leader writing team at the FT.
Instead, he joined Goldman Sachs, working in London, Tokyo,
New York and the Toronto offices. And after serving at the
Bank of Canada and the Ministry of Finance he became
Governor of the Bank of Canada in 2008. His timing was
perfect because it was just right in the middle of the global
financial crisis.
Now the Canadian economy outperformed its G7 peers during
this crisis, thanks in part to decisive policy choices, including
what we now know as forward guidance on interest rates.
So Mr Carney is a cosmopolitan, an economist, and a man of
action, a rare combination. Governor, we look forward to
your remarks.

Applause

Page 3
Mark Carney, Governor Speech - 24-10-13

Mark Carney, Governor:

Thank you very much Lionel, thank you all for being here. I
think when you hear this speech you'll realise why I didn't
apply to be a leader writer at the FT - over the next 45
minutes I will now expand - no it will be a little shorter than
that, but this is central bank stuff, not the thrilling prose of
the FT.
I'd like to thank all of you for being here, thank my
colleagues the governors, fellow governors of the Bank of
England, Charlie Bean and Andrew Bailey for being here, pay
testament to the service of Paul Tucker over the last 33
years. And the three of us Charlie, Andrew and myself wait
in breathless anticipation for the arrival of Sir Jon Cunliffe in a
few weeks' time.
See Governor’s speech :
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/spe
eches/2013/speech690.pdf

Applause
Lionel Barber,
Editor, Financial Times:

Well, ladies and gentlemen, I think we can all agree,
Governor you've got the job. We're going to be - in the spirit
of the Financial Times in 2013 both analogue - I will be asking
a couple of questions of the Governor - and then digital in
that we will be opening questions to the audience.
Now Governor you've given a vote of confidence in finance,
qualified of course on adequate regulation and making the
global finance, in your words, robust but resilient. But I am
tempted to quote your countryman, your distinguished
countryman, Wayne Gretzky, the ice hockey player, who I
believe said that - "It's important when you're playing ice
hockey to skate where the puck is going, not where the puck
has been." And my question is whether, for all the best

Page 4
Mark Carney, Governor Speech - 24-10-13

intentions regulators around the world, not just at the Bank,
are looking backwards and fighting the last war on excess
leverage, etc., rather than looking to the next crisis?
Mark Carney, Governor:

First, I'm very impressed by the Wayne Gretzky …

Lionel Barber,
Editor Financial Times:

I've been working on that one.

Mark Carney, Governor:

… truly cosmopolitan. I think I'd say a couple of things. First
there are a couple of basic lessons from finance, and the first
is that ultimately leverage gets you in trouble. So that lesson
of warfare and finance is always valid. Related to that is problems soon arrive when one sees sustained above trend
borrowing by any mechanism.
But I would say, without going into too much detail, because
we don't have that much time, that there is a huge swath of
work that I didn't touch on which relates to the shadow
banking sector. And the advantage of it is it's not - it's
looking at economic function, as opposed to going to specific
types of institutions.
So it's about whether there are collective investment vehicles,
whether there are vehicles that facilitate credit
intermediation, such as insurance, credit insurance, monoline
type insurance, but such as, as opposed to just going back to
fix the monolines, or just going back in the first example to
fix the CIVs, which of course don't really exist any more.
And so that swath of work, which is going to mature over the
course of this year, is the Gretzky work, if you will, it's going
to where the puck isn't yet. But, in part because of what
we're been doing in applying the lessons, the core lessons of
warfare - to mix my analogies - will be encouraged by the

Page 5
Mark Carney, Governor Speech - 24-10-13

activities. So the activities we're doing on the reform side
actually encourage some of the other …
Lionel Barber,
Editor Financial Times:

So no hiding place for shadow banking?

Mark Carney, Governor:

No, no and the objective is to turn that from - in our parlance
- from shadow banking to market based finance. And one of
the themes of what I was trying to say is that good markets
are transparent. They have robust infrastructure, they are
structured in a way that is continuous, so they aren't discrete.
And unfortunately, much of shadow banking doesn't meet
those criteria and so we will move it in that direction.

Lionel Barber,
Editor Financial Times:

Let me phrase the question somewhat differently. Some
politicians in this country have identified what they see as a
trade-off between greater stability (more capital) and growth,
that is more leverage. Now do you accept that trade-off or
do you think you've find a way of resolving the tension?

Mark Carney, Governor:

I've been very fortunate in my timing because my colleagues
- and Andrew and Charlie are here today representing them and they're very much part of these decisions. They
recognised, through the FPC of the Bank of England, that the
trade-off is not there if the core institutions are inadequately
capitalised. And through a series of efforts, most notably
earlier this year where they got a lot of noise around them
from maybe some of those same politicians you're referring
to.

Lionel Barber,
Editor Financial Times:

You're referring to the comments about the 'Capital Taliban?'

Mark Carney, Governor:

Well you can refer to them, and I can just leave it out there in
the ether. But the core point was that unless financial

Page 6
Mark Carney, Governor Speech - 24-10-13

institutions are adequately capitalised, they don't go out and
search new business. They're looking over their shoulder;
they have become fundamentally risk averse in part because
their investors, their creditors and they themselves know this.
It is interesting that - and I don't think this is just a
correlation, I think this is a causation - that once the core of
the system here reached the FPC's 7% threshold, which is a
fairly demanding threshold, once it reached that associated
with leverage, then we've started to see a growth again in
credit.
Lionel Barber,
Editor Financial Times:

And do you believe that this argument actually is being
resolved by the numbers on the ground, the data that Britain
has turned the corner in terms of its economic performance?

Mark Carney, Governor:

I think - and Charlie mentioned this yesterday, I certainly
agree - that one of the reasons to think that there could be
some sustainability, some traction in the recovery, is that the
core of the financial system here has gotten a lot better. I
won't say it's fully healed, but gotten a lot better. And the
rebuilding of capital is a big element of that.

Lionel Barber,
Editor Financial Times:

But just a year ago I think there was a consensus even at the
Financial Times that the financial system and the transmission
mechanisms for credit were essentially broken. Do you
believe that's still true?

Mark Carney, Governor:

It's substantially less true, certainly not broken. It's not
operating as well as it ultimately will, the financial
transmission mechanism, that's why we still have Funding for
Lending in place, that's why in some respects why we still
have exceptionally accommodative monetary policy. That
healing process still has to proceed for a while. But what has

Page 7
Mark Carney, Governor Speech - 24-10-13

changed is that at the core of the system, the core of the
system is functioning.
I'll make one final point if I may. One of the things we
shouldn't measure though, for a sustainable recovery in the
UK is an aggregate growth in credit. This is still an economy
where there is a large and desirable deleveraging of the
economy. So we're not necessarily going to get the
aggregates growing. What's important is that the new
businesses and the young families are able to get access to
credit.
Lionel Barber,
Editor Financial Times:

So was that a full-throated endorsement for Help to Buy?

Mark Carney, Governor:

That was - boy I didn't touch it there at all - it was a fullthroated endorsement for Funding for Lending and for the
FPC's effort to fix the core.

Lionel Barber,
Editor Financial Times:

And bankers are telling me that Funding for Lending really is
actually making a difference - much maligned in certain
quarters at the beginning.

Mark Carney, Governor:

I think it makes a difference for those - it makes a difference
because it, plus a few other things have substantially
improved the overall funding markets. Look, funding has
come down 250 to 300 basis points, at the core of the system
funding rates. That's helped very much by Europe, but
Funding for Lending played an important role in that.

Lionel Barber,
Editor Financial Times:

Now you did give a full-throated endorsement of the role of
the City of London, but figures this week and the Deputy
Governor, Charlie Bean, cited the relatively poor, slightly
worrying performance on the export of financial services from

Page 8
Mark Carney, Governor Speech - 24-10-13

the City. Can you explain what's going on or is this is a
temporary phenomenon?
Mark Carney, Governor:

Well there's two things happening. One is that the overall
level of cross-border capital flows - and I touched on it briefly
in the speech - have gone down substantially since the crisis,
down more than 50%, almost 60% on some measures; that's
pure cross-border flows. A lot of that is in Europe, but there's
more transatlantic and developed, emerging market. Some
of that, in fact a substantial proportion of that, is actually
desirable. This was short-term, wholesale finance between
banks in Europe; we know how well that's worked out. It was
structured products from the US back into Europe as well again that's not something that's necessarily desirable.
What it has shrunk down into though is a core of more
sustainable flows, which we would expect to grow from there.
Now whether or not UK institutions maintain market share or
increase market share is up to them. What we have to do is
organise the system in a way that ensures domestic stability.
And we think we can do that.

Lionel Barber,
Editor Financial Times:

Now before I open questions, no conversation with the
Governor of the Bank of England and the Financial Times
would be complete without some reference to Europe. You
studiously avoided any reference, Governor, to the question
of banking union. Do you believe that if banking union does
go ahead, that the role of the City is secure, that we will not
be discriminated against by that deeper integration in
Europe?

Mark Carney, Governor:

Well it goes to international engagement, it goes to
engagement at European level. It's something that all the
governors are very focused on; it's one of the advantages of
Jon Cunliffe coming in. I myself, you know, I have to say the

Page 9
Mark Carney, Governor Speech - 24-10-13

first outward phone call I made was to Mario Draghi as
Governor, the first meeting I had was …
Lionel Barber,
Editor Financial Times:

Because you took over from him as the Head of the FSB.

Mark Carney, Governor:

… the Head of the FSB, one of my first meeting was with
Michel Barnier, I am Vice Chair of the SRB, I go to the
General Council meetings. We - and this is true of my
colleagues in their settings as well and it will be true up and
down the chain in the Bank of England. And the way to make
this work is to be engaged. And that means we have the dual
structure where we are the supervisor here, we are the
macroprudential regulator here. We make the SRB work, we
make the General Council at the ECB work, we make the
Commission work in a way that suits UK financial services.
But the only way to do that is to be engaged.

Lionel Barber,
Editor Financial Times:

So no empty chair policy being pursued by the Governor of
the Bank of England. The first question from the floor is Ana
Botin, please do stand up.

Ana Botin, CEO Santander:

Thank you. So Mr Governor, my question - you won't be
surprised - relates to regulation and growth. You alluded to
many of the reforms that have either happened or are being
implemented. But being very disciplined, I will obey what the
Editor suggested in terms of being forward looking.
So my question would be, what sense checks, if any, has the
FPC put in place, or would you recommend that the FPC put
in place, so that as we go into very important months ahead
where all the details of the ICB and PCBS recommendations
are going to be finally detailed? That we both get what
policymakers and I think all of us want, which is robust
legislation, but that we don't get - and I'd say two things -

Page 10
Mark Carney, Governor Speech - 24-10-13

one is we don't disadvantage UK Plc, and specifically our
small and medium sized companies that obviously could be
affected by these structural reforms. And second, and very
importantly, that the investability of UK banks is again good,
and vis-à-vis not only US and German banks, but also
thinking about the financial sector vis-à-vis other sectors, as
we go through these very important structural reform details
that our friend Bill Winters and others have been working on?
Mark Carney, Governor:

I think a couple of things, one is we will, and we have
commented on the - as you know on the PCBS - the current
set of recommendations they're working through the
legislation and that's in the public domain. Obviously we, the
FPC, but the broader Bank, the PRA itself, and the broader
Bank are taking a clear focus on the prudential aspects, both
micro and macroprudential.
We have secondary objectives, which are to support strong,
sustainable and balanced growth, effectively in the cases of
both and we take those very seriously. So it's prudence, but
in the context of having satisfied that, we support it. And so
this isn't, to use another phrase where you were drifting
towards, this isn't about stability of the graveyard; it's about
appropriate levels of resilience in the system.
Now a resilient UK banking system is going to perform better,
I mean ultimately investors will make those determinations.
But again if you look at - since the much maligned, but
correct, in my opinion certainly, FPC effort, you know price to
book ratios of UK banks have gone back towards unity from
heavy discounts. Things that make this system work, make it
work better at the core are ultimately going to change the
sharp ratio; I can use it with you because of investing in UK
financial institutions.

Page 11
Mark Carney, Governor Speech - 24-10-13

But we're conscious - we're absolutely conscious it's a macro
institution ultimately, the Bank of England, and we're very
conscious of getting that balance right so that once we've
achieved those appropriate levels of resilience, that it's not
overdone. So I'll leave it at that.
Lionel Barber,
Editor Financial Times:

Thank you Governor, Evelyn de Rothschild.

Evelyn de Rothschild, Financier:

Mr Governor, the FT has been through many financial crises
and survives today in a remarkable way. I would just like to
point out and ask you a question. Five years ago when we
had our financial crisis, I think it's fair to say that the general
public lost confidence in the banking system. That confidence
has been eroded; it's not only been eroded in the United
Kingdom, Europe and the United States.
Can you answer me, on the basis that you think confidence is
coming back, and do you believe that central banks generally
worldwide should be more open and more publicly aware of
the average person who tries to open accounts and has
confidence in the bank - not only your Bank Sir, but
everyone's bank?

Mark Carney, Governor:

Yes, well I think you're absolutely right there's been a loss of
confidence in banks; there's been a loss of confidence in the
system, and higher than that there's been a loss of
confidence between authorities in the system or trust
between authorities in the system. And we've been going
through a process of trying to build that back up.
What's necessary - and confidence you know - with the
Montek Singh Ahluwalia, the most famous version of this
which is it grows with the rate of a coconut tree and falls with
the speed of the coconut. We've had the fall and now it's got
to be grown back up. How do we nurture it?

Page 12
Mark Carney, Governor Speech - 24-10-13

Capital is part of it, that's obvious. I think capitalism is part
of it, actually making the system fair, so ending 'too big to
fail' is a large element. There is a need - I think
compensation has been a big element from a public
perspective. I would suggest that - as important as some of
the compensation, the initial compensation reforms have
been - so to get proper alignment of employee incentives,
investing in claw backs, etc., - as important as those have
been, compensation structures can't ultimately replace
culture within an organisation and so institutions really need
to get their culture right and in the end their core values
right.
And that ultimately goes back to the end customer. So
understanding that without a prosperous real economy,
prosperous customers - the institution itself isn't going to
prosper. So they have to be speaking to these people and
hearing the messages.
So I'll finish by just saying, look we - I think central banks do
recognise, certainly the Bank of England recognises, this
fundamental hit to confidence. And also I'll say one thing and
just personalise it - it used to really strike me when I would
come to the UK, to a slightly lesser extent to the US, from
Canada, as Governor of the Bank of Canada, how different
things were, how different the attitudes were towards the
institutions, how much confidence had been hit. And I don't
know if it was fear, but it was certainly loathing that had
replaced confidence in that regard, and it gives a sense of the
scale of the challenge.
Lionel Barber,
Editor Financial Times:

Next question, a question from the audience, yes, Frances.

Page 13
Mark Carney, Governor Speech - 24-10-13

Frances O'Grady, TUC:

Thanks very much Lionel for the free advert as we walked
into the hall. Governor, it's good to see the Bank taking
account of unemployment in its assessment of the economy.
But isn't counting numbers in and out of work a bit crude?
Shouldn't we also be looking at the record number of parttime workers seeking more hours and of course what's
happening in terms of people's real pay and living standards?

Mark Carney, Governor:

Let me say this, I mean certainly in terms of our guidance we
take into account unemployment. The unemployment rate is
the, as you know, the threshold for a reconsideration of
monetary policy, whether or not we would adjust our
overnight rate. But we've tried to make very clear that we
look at a much broader range of indicators both in terms of
slack in the labour market, but more broadly slack in the
economy.
And when the economy gets to that staging post of 7% we
will look, and we do even today, look at other factors such as
the proportion of workers who are working part time but want
to work full time, which is in the upper teens and used to be
substantially lower. We look at hours worked. And what
we've seen over the course of the last year is that there
actually has been a steady increase in the amount of hours
worked for people who are working. There is a revealed
preference for people to work longer.
And unfortunately that may relate to what's happening with
wages and underlying wage pressures, which are very low at
the moment. It may also have to do with the shift of
employment from the public to the private sector, so we look
at those factors. And we'll also look at other factors in terms
of proportion of long-term unemployed and whether or not
those workers can come back into the market.

Page 14
Mark Carney, Governor Speech - 24-10-13

So we do look, and we will continue to look, at a very broad
range of labour market indicators to get a true indication of
what the degree of slack is in the labour market and as a
consequence what that means for activity and inflation. And
remembering in all of this that, while we are using the
unemployment rate as a threshold to then take stock, we are
above and at the beginning and the end inflation targeters,
and our job is ultimately about getting inflation back to the
2% target on the appropriate horizon.
Lionel Barber,
Editor Financial Times:

Ladies and gentlemen, I'm very sorry, but there is a very
tight timetable that we're on. The Governor is going to give a
press conference. Evelyn in recognition of your request that
the Bank should be a little bit more open.
But I would just ask everyone who's come tonight - and I
should have thanked you from the outset for coming, it's an
extraordinary gathering of people here tonight - to thank the
Governor for giving us a really interesting lecture. He's
covered an enormous amount of terrain, note I don't say
battleground, and we're all extremely grateful, including at
the Financial Times. Thank you, Mr Governor.

Applause
END

