The Future Financial Landscape
Speech given by
David Miles, Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England

16 December 2009

I would like to thank Conall Maccoille, Matt Corder, Chris Thomas and Helen Lawton for research
assistance and I am also grateful for helpful comments from other colleagues. The views expressed
are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of England or other members of the
Monetary Policy Committee.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Almost exactly eighty years ago, at the end of 1929, the Macmillan Committee was
established. Its members were appointed by Philip Snowden, Chancellor of the
Exchequer in Ramsay Macdonald’s government, in the wake of the 1929 crash. Its
purpose was to analyse the links between the banks, the financial markets and the wider
economy and to recommend how monetary policy should be conducted to prevent the
sort of deep recession the economy was then descending into. Its dominant member was
John Maynard Keynes – who was largely responsible for drafting the report which
appeared in 1931 and which contained many of the arguments that would later appear in
his General Theory.
In describing the reasons why the Committee was established here is what the Report –
and that effectively means Keynes – said:
“Not only was the adequacy of the volume of credit created called in question, but the
efficacy of the means of distribution was also the subject of adverse discussion. It may
indeed be said that at no time since the termination of the historic disputes which
followed the Napoleonic wars and which led to the passing of the Bank Act of 1844 has
the monetary organisation of our country been the subject of so much criticism as in
recent times.”
What was true in 1929 is true eighty years later – the efficiency of the means of the
distribution of credit is once again called into question and has been, as the Macmillan
Committee put it, “the subject of adverse discussion”. This is inevitable given the scale
of the problems in the banking sector we have seen over the past two years – both in the
UK and across the world. The way in which banks operate will now be different – in the
near term because of the damage done to their balance sheets and the continuing fragility
of their funding; and in the longer term because of the need to ensure that the chances of
another banking collapse like the one we have just seen are much reduced. Today I want
to consider how this might play out and what the macroeconomic implications – for
monetary policy in particular – are1. I think it is likely – and quite probably desirable –
that banks will become less significant intermediaries in channelling savings from

1

Some of the regulatory implications are examined by Andrew Haldane: “Banking on the State”,
November 6th 2009 (available on the Bank of England web site).

2

households to companies and to other households. This poses short term and longer term
issues which have (very different) implications for monetary policy.
The banking sector will become smaller
There are several reasons why banks are likely to become less important as financial
intermediaries channelling saving from one part of the private sector to another:
First, in recent years banks have not held enough capital given the type and magnitude of
assets they have acquired. Chart 1 shows that in the UK banking sector capital, relative
to assets, in the years leading up to the onset of the crisis in 2007 was around half the
level that was typical 50 years earlier and probably around one third the level that was
usual 100 years ago. In the US the decline in bank capital over the past 100 years is quite
probably even larger.
The capital ratio shown here is not weighted by any estimate of the relative riskiness of
assets, so it would over-state the decline in what one might call effective capital if assets
had become safer. But it is not at all clear that the riskiness of bank assets has become
lower. For most of the twentieth century a very much higher proportion of bank assets
were held as claims on the government or central bank than has been the case in recent
years. And for much of the twentieth century most lending to the private sector was short
term bank lending to companies. So bank assets are quite likely to have been both less
risky and more liquid in the past than they became in recent decades. Banks will in
future need to hold more capital relative to their assets – that seems inevitable given the
consensus amongst regulators and I think it is highly desirable. What impact that will
have on the cost of intermediating funds through banks is not easy to judge. The
Modigliani Miller theorem would suggest the impact on the overall (weighted average)
cost of funds to banks would be zero; there would be no change in the weighted average
cost of debt and equity. But there are many reasons (largely to do with asymmetric
information, deposit insurance and tax) why that is not likely to hold2. So it is very likely
that the cost of bank funds will rise and as a result less saving will be channelled through
them.

2

The Modigliani Miller theorem says that in a market with no distortions changes in the composition of
funding between debt and equity do not change the overall cost of finance for a company.

3

A second reason why banks will probably become less important in intermediating funds
within the private sector is because they have not held enough liquid assets. That is
assets that are reliably liquid under stressed conditions. Reliably liquid assets are not
claims on the private sector. They are claims on the central bank and government debt.
Chart 2 shows that holdings of these most liquid assets have fallen from about a third of
bank assets 50 years ago to a tiny proportion of assets (at least until the recent policy of
quantitative easing, which has boosted the reserves of banks at the Bank of England).
Chart 1: Capital levels relative to total

Chart 2: Liquidity Ratio of the UK

holdings for UK and US banks

Banking Sector
Per cent

Per cent
25
(d)

(c)

United
States(a)

45
40

20

35
30

15

25
20

10

United
Kingdom (b)

15
10

5

5

0
1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

0
1921 1931

2000

Sources: United States: Berger, A, Herring, R and Szegö, G
(1995), 'The role of capital in financial institutions', Journal of
Banking and Finance, Vol 19(3-4), pages 393-430. United
Kingdom: Sheppard, D (1971), The growth and role of UK
financial institutions 1880-1962, Methuen, London; Billings, M
and Capie, F (2007), 'Capital in British banking', 1920-1970,
Business History, Vol 49(2), pages 139-162; BBA, published
accounts and Bank calculations. (a) US data show equity as a
percentage of assets (ratio of aggregate dollar value of bank book
equity to aggregate dollar value of bank book assets). (b) UK data
on the capital ratio show equity and reserves over total assets on a
time-varying sample of banks, representing the majority of the UK
banking system, in terms of assets. Prior to 1970 published
accounts understated the true level of banks' capital because they
did not include hidden reserves. The solid line adjusts for this.
2009 observation is from H1. (c) Change in UK accounting
standards. (d) International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS)
were adopted for the end-2005 accounts. The end-2004 accounts
were also restated on an IFRS basis. The switch from UK GAAP to
IFRS reduced the capital ratio of the UK banks in the sample by
approximately 1 percentage point in 2004.

1941

1951 1961

1971 1981

1991

2001

Sources: Bank of England, Financial Stability Review June 2009
and 'The British Economy, Key Statistics 1900-1970', published for
the London & Cambridge Economic Service. From 1968 the
liquidity ratio is: Cash + Bank of England balances + money at call
+ eligible bills + UK gilts as a percentage of banks' total asset
holdings. Prior to 1968 the ratio is calculated as the liquid assets of
the London Clearing Banks as a percentage of gross deposits, as
defined in 'The British Economy, Key Statistics 1900-1970'.

These two things – banks coming to have lower capital and less liquid assets – reflect, to
some extent, the subsidy generated to intermediation through banks by implicit and
explicit insurance given by the state – though they almost certainly also reflect excessive
4

optimism that steady growth and rising asset prices would continue and that because of
this banks would have no problems continuing to finance acquisition of assets by rolling
over short maturity debt.
The belief that there was state insurance of banks – a belief which was probably
widespread across the large economies and which would have made it easier for banks to
raise funds for a given level of capital and a given degree of liquidity – has been justified
by the actions of governments which have supported banks (and on a massive scale). The
commitments of the government of the UK to its banks (including those channelled
through the Bank of England) are around 60% of GDP3. Such commitments are very
substantial – though lower – in several other large developed economies (Chart 3). But
the UK does stand out.
Chart 3: Public sector interventions in selected
countries during the financial crisis(a)(b)
%
70
U.K
60
U.S.
50

40
Belgium
30
Germany
20

Portugal
Lux.

10

0
Italy

Spain

France

Finland

Austria

Netherlands

Sources: Bank of England, HM Treasury, US Federal Reserve, US Treasury,
FDIC, IMF World Economic Outlook (October 2009), BIS, ECB and Bank
calculations. (a) End of month data expressed as percentages of 2007
nominal GDP (b) Scale of interventions recorded as potential size of
packages when announced, rather than as drawn. Total interventions include
insurance, investments, and lending by central banks and governments to
financial institutions under measures introduced after the crisis began.
Investments are composed of capital injections to banks and SPVs,
guarantees of first loss tranches and direct holdings of assets. Unlimited
guarantees have not been included. (c) The US Guarantee Program for
Money Market Funds expired on 18 September 2009 and the size of the UK
Asset Protection Scheme was reduced on 3 November 2009. The estimates
for the UK do not include purchases under the Asset Purchase Facility.

3

The recent UK audit office estimate puts the scale of the commitment of the UK government to the banks
at around £850 billion.

5

Maybe it has always been thus. Tacitus describes how the Emperor Tiberius felt
compelled to sort out a banking crisis in 33 AD by “distributing throughout the banks a
hundred million sesterces, and allowing freedom to borrow without interest for three
years, provided the borrower gave security to the State in land to double the amount”. He
goes on to say that “Credit was thus restored, and gradually private lenders were found.”
(Book VI, The Annals, Tacitus). If that is accurate then the resources applied to sorting
out that bank crisis were relatively small. At the time the average daily wage was
probably around 3 sesterces4. So the value of the resources used in the support measures
was around the equivalent of 35 million working days. In contrast the value of the
commitments made by the UK government today could have a value that is the
equivalent of around 8 billion working days5 – more than 200 times as much. Since the
populations of the UK today and of the Roman Empire in AD 33 were probably of the
same orders of magnitude it seems clear that today’s support measures are far greater
than those of Tiberius6.
In the recent past the belief by banks’ creditors that governments would support those
banks if serious problems arose allowed banks to access funds at a lower price than
would otherwise have been available – given their capital and given the quality of their
assets7. This subsidy acted to increase the size of the banking sector. And the banking
sector in the UK has indeed grown enormously. Banking sector assets – relative to the
size of the economy – were fairly stable at about 50% of GDP in the hundred years from
1875 to 1975, but in the last 40 years have increased about 10 fold. They now stand at
about 500% of annual GDP. Much of that increase reflects UK banks’ overseas business.
But even if we exclude foreign currency assets there has been a huge increase in the size
of bank balance sheets relative to the economy; they have risen roughly five-fold since
1980.
The enormous growth of the banking sector to some extent also reflects a general subsidy
to debt financing through the tax treatment of interest payments. Companies can deduct
4

See S J Bastomsky (1990) “Rich and Poor: the Great Divide in Ancient Rome and Victorian England”,
Greece and Rome, vol 37, No 1, pages 37-43.
5
If we assume an average daily wage for a full-time worker of a little over £100 (which is a generous
estimate) and that the size of the support measures is in line with the audit office estimate of £850 billion.
6
There is great diversity in estimates of the size of the population of the Roman Empire at that time. Most
estimates seem to be in the range 45-65 million, though there are estimates that are far greater and much
smaller.
7
One indication of this is that banks have exceptionally high leverage (or gearing) relative to most nonfinancial companies, but until the financial crisis they have not had a substantially higher cost of debt.

6

interest payments, but not dividends, as a cost against their corporation tax. This is likely
to give a tax incentive to use debt rather than equity, though the extent to which it does so
depends on the way in which personal incomes are taxed as well as on the tax code for
companies. The tax system could be made more neutral if either equity were given the
same treatment as debt, or if the tax deductibility of interest on debt was removed.
Clearly they have different effects on the overall amount of tax paid by companies.
As banks have grown relative to the size of the economy the composition of their assets
(and their liquidity) has changed. One striking aspect of this – noted above – has been
the enormous reduction in the proportion of assets that are government debt. 30 years
ago banks were major holders of gilts. Between 1950 and 1980 on average around twothirds of banks’ overall supply of credit to the domestic private and public sectors was in
the form of holdings of public debt, but that has now fallen to close to zero (Chart 5).
Chart 4: UK banking sector assets relative

Chart 5: Proportion of domestic credit of

to size of the economy

UK banking institutions accounted for by
the public sector
%

Banking sector assets (per cent of GDP)

90

600

80

500
70
60

400

50

300

40
30

200

20

100

10
0

0
1880

1904

1928

1952

1976

1951

2000

Source: ‘Banking on the State’ Speech by Andy Haldane, 6
November 2009 and Sheppard, D.K. (1971) ‘The Growth and Role
of UK Financial Institutions 1880-1962’, Methuen, and Bank of
England.

1961

1971

1981

1991

2001

Source: International Monetary Fund, Banking Survey, International
Financial Statistics Database, November 2009. Note: Chart 5 is
based on UK’s banks domestic loans to the UK private sector and
UK government. It does not include UK banks’ foreign assets and
liabilities. Building societies are included in this measure. See IFS
database for details on coverage of banks and building societies.

So a range of factors account for the enormous growth of banks: banks have been
allowed to hold less capital than they used to and many seem to have actively aimed to
minimise their capital requirements under Basle rules; they have come to hold less liquid
assets than they used to; a belief that banks would be supported by the state has been
confirmed by past events and has been vindicated by how the current crisis has played

7

out; the tax system has favoured debt financing; and the recent period of steady growth
and rising asset prices fostered confidence that bank balance sheets were fundamentally
strong.
Many of these factors will change and some of them have changed already. The
optimism about the fundamental strength of bank balance sheets has evaporated; capital
and liquidity requirements are being increased; and it seems natural to now question why
debt finance should be subsidised, particularly if it not only costs tax revenue but also
increases risks of the government using tax payers’ money to deal with the impacts of
higher leverage in the banking sector.
The impacts of a smaller banking sector
So it is likely that banks will become less important. What will be the impact of bank
assets being smaller as a proportion of GDP and what should the response of policy –
specifically monetary policy – be? In thinking about this it is useful to distinguish
between the near term and the longer term.
The long run impact of less saving being channelled through banks depends crucially
upon how dependent companies and households are on bank debt, what substitutes to
bank credit are available and how close those substitutes are. Looking at the balance
sheets of households and non financial companies reveals a good deal about this.
Chart 6 shows that the proportion of the overall liabilities of UK private non-financial
companies (PNFCs) that are bank debt. Bank loans finance a much smaller part of the
corporate stock of assets than does equity (about 20% relative to around 60%). But the
importance of bank credit has increased from around 10% at the beginning of the decade
to over 20% in 2009. That rise in the importance of bank debt went sharply into reverse
this year when companies have been repaying bank debt and issuing substantial amounts
of new equity and corporate bonds.
Households have fewer options for outside finance than do companies. But they have
also relied to a far greater extent upon savings for asset accumulation. (Household
savings are ultimately the only source of net asset accumulation, though gross asset
accumulation can be financed by debt). A comparable measure for household reliance

8

upon debt in accumulating gross assets should take account of the importance of human
capital (the future value of labour income). Corporate balance sheets implicitly value the
future stream of corporate earnings through the market value of their assets (or the value
of their equity – as is done in Chart 6). We can do something similar for households by
estimating the present discounted value of future labour income and adding that to the
value of financial and tangible assets to form a comprehensive measure of gross wealth.
Chart 7 shows that the stock of bank loans to households is estimated to finance about 7%
of that comprehensive measure of assets. Excluding human capital, the figure would be
around 20%.
Chart 6: UK PNFC Bank Debt as a

Chart 7: UK Household Debt as a

proportion of Total Financial Liabilities

proportion of Household Wealth
per cent

%
25

25
Household Debt / Housing and Human Wealth and
Financial Assets
Household Debt / Housing Wealth and Financial
Assets

20

20

15

15

10

10

5

5

0

0
1987

1992

1997

2002

1957

2007

Source: Office for National Statistics and Bank of England
Calculations. Note: PNFC Bank Debt includes debts with Building
Societies.

1967

1977

1987

1997

2007

Source: Office for National Statistics and Bank of England
Calculations. Human Wealth assumptions follow Bakhshi, H
(2000), ‘The sensitivity of aggregate consumption to human
wealth’, Bank of England Working Paper No. 108

How costly might it be for households and non-financial companies to find alternatives to
bank debt? We can put the question a different way by asking what might be particularly
efficient about channelling savings within the private sector through the intermediation of
banks. One answer is that banks specialise in assessing and monitoring the creditworthiness of potential borrowers and that there are substantial economies in scale to that.
Douglas Diamond, amongst others, has shown that in principle there are significant gains
in having large banks save on the costs of assessing borrowers. By delegating the
monitoring function to banks there could be efficiency gains in handling the implications

9

of asymmetric information between ultimate borrowers and lenders.8 This does not in
itself imply that banks should be largely debt financed. But there is an argument that
asymmetric information, which is both a cause and consequence of delegating monitoring
to banks, may make debt contracts natural – both between borrowers and the banks, and
between the banks and the suppliers of finance to them. A fixed debt contract is a more
natural one when assets are hard to assess than one which makes returns to an investor
depend on asset values9.
So this line of thinking says that financial intermediaries should play a role in financing
risky borrowing and that we should expect them to be very largely debt financed.
Further, this debt may need to be short term – as a discipline device on the managers of
banks10. If this is right it suggests there is some cost to forcing banks to hold a lot more
equity capital – and it is one reason why the simple Modigliani Miller proposition is not
likely to hold for banks.
I used to find this set of arguments pretty persuasive. Today I am much less convinced.
There may be some natural efficiencies in having risky credit intermediated through
highly leveraged banks who have short term debt contracts with most of those who
supply their funds. But it is very clear that this arrangement also generates costs
(stemming from the state needing to provide explicit or implicit insurance) and those
costs may not fall upon the banks. Furthermore, to the extent that the retail debt
liabilities of banks are insured this undermines the incentives of bank creditors to monitor
bank management and, by withdrawing funds, to discipline the management. If providers
of wholesale funds are not insured they may provide the discipline – but that may also
generate wider costs if they withdraw funds and precipitate a generalised liquidity crisis.
The microeconomic case for having large, highly levered banks making risky loans
begins to unravel when system-wide contagion effects become important11.

8

See “Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring”, Review of Economic Studies, vol 51, pages
393-414.
9

For a formal statement of the argument see Gale and Hellwig: “Incentive Compatible Debt Contracts: The
One Period Problem”, Review of Economic Studies, 1985, pages 647-663.
10
See “A Theory of Bank Capital”, Douglas Diamond and Raghuram Rajan, The Journal of Finance,
December 2000, pages 2431-2465
11
To the extent that the microeconomic case depends upon diversification of assets held by each bank
which removes uncertainty (and important element in the Diamond 1984 paper) it assumes away these
systematic effects.

10

So there is no reason at all to conclude that the potential efficiencies from bank
intermediation mean limits on the assets they can hold and on the structure of their
liabilities must be inefficient. And it is certainly wrong to think that because households
want certainty of value and high liquidity, and want a return that is higher than that on
truly safe and liquid assets, then banks must be allowed to try to provide it – something
that is only likely to be possible with government subsidies. The argument that banks
have to be allowed to hold risky assets while offering safe deposits – or else the returns
on that saving will be too low – is sometimes presented as a case against so-called narrow
banking. But that argument comes close to saying that tax-payers must provide subsidies
to make bank liabilities safer than the balance sheets of banks really allow. This is a bad
argument.
There are nonetheless potentially some real costs in having less finance channelled
through banks that are largely financed with debt. Those costs are the counterpart to the
benefits of devolved, or delegated, monitoring and also reflect the natural tendency of
those who provide funding for activities that are not easy to value to prefer a fixed
contract (i.e. debt) rather than one that makes them explicitly share in the value of assets
they cannot easily assess (i.e. equity).
It may be that these efficiency gains from having levered banks intermediate funds are
small. I think this is the view implicitly taken by Laurence Kotlikoff, who has argued
that banks should not hold risky loans12. Instead banks might originate lending but then
package the loans into securities which would be sold to unit trusts and mutual funds who
would market them to households who would then have claims whose values explicitly
varied with the value of the underlying portfolios. There could never be a banking crisis
in such a world. This way of looking at things downplays the delegated monitoring
efficiencies stressed by Diamond and others. It assumes that what are currently bank
loans can become assets with values that can be verified – which probably means traded
on secondary markets. There are reasons why this is not easy for many of the assets
banks hold – some would go further and say that the raison d’être of banks is to hold
assets that cannot be easily traded and to specialise in assessing their worth. Of course

12

See, for example, Laurence Kotlikoff and Niall Ferguson, “How to Take Moral Hazard Out of Banking”
Financial Times, December 3rd 2009. John Kay makes the case for banks not funding risky loans by
issuing insured deposits: “Narrow Banking: The Reform of Banking Regulation”, CSFI paper 88,
September 2009.

11

that would suggest that the very large quantity of tradable assets (or securities) held by
banks do not naturally sit within the banking sector.
Anyway, it is one thing to say that assessing the credit worthiness of a potential borrower
is hard and quite another to say that banks have such a comparative advantage, such
efficiency, in doing this that to have them do less intermediation is very costly. It is very
clear now that the monitoring of asset quality by banks in recent years was done far less
well than almost anyone thought likely. And it is not self evident that even when it is
hard to assess the value of projects that need funding that a debt contract is always the
optimal form of finance. Most of the financing of the investment done in the
industrialisation of UK did not come via banks. The construction of the railways (and
before them the canals) was not mainly financed by bank loans but was largely through
companies issuing their own debt and equity (initially private equity and without limited
liability). Nor, for that matter, were dot.com investments of the 1990’s – where there was
a huge amount of uncertainty about the value of the projects – largely financed by debt.
My own hunch is that a combination of tax factors and implicit subsidies from state
support are very important in accounting for the increasing importance of banks, and that
their recent spectacular growth does not primarily reflect the efficiencies created by
delegating monitoring to bank credit assessors.
Macroeconomic effects of a smaller banking sector
Because of this, policies which have as a side effect that they reduce the amount of
intermediation through banks are not, for that reason, undesirable. But they will have
side effects. Their impact might be akin that of a tax on bank intermediation. One effect
could be a bigger spread between lending and borrowing rates. To the extent that the
squeezed spreads of recent years were a reflection of a too low compensation for risks
that people did not understand (and which were under-written by the state) – rather than
high efficiency in intermediating savings – then the resulting allocations were not optimal
anyway.
The implications of higher spreads between bank borrowing and lending rates might
include:

12

1. less saving through banks – and quite possibly less overall saving
2. less investment financed by banks – and quite probably less aggregate investment
3. less credit to households and potentially a lower owner occupation rate and lower
house prices.
Not all of these potential effects are negative: a lower owner occupation rate in no way
means a lower standard of living and nor do lower house prices.
It is very important to see that none of this means that the growth rate of the economy
need be lower. One reason is that negative effects are offset to some (very?) significant
extent by the likelihood of less volatility and less serious financial crises13. IMF and
other estimates suggest that of the order of 10% of GDP may be lost forever as a result of
serious banking crises. Suppose they come along every 50 years but that if banks have
very much lower leverage, hold more liquid assets and that the banking sector is also
smaller those problems only cause a drop in GDP of 5% rather than 10%. Suppose
underlying growth in normal times, and with a large and levered banking sector, averages
2.75%. The lower fragility equilibrium with a smaller banking sector is one where we
could have growth in normal times of only a little above 2.6% and still get the same long
run outcomes. This simple example shows that even if one side effect of a smaller
baking sector is that in normal times the economy were to grow more slowly, that effect
could be offset by there being less serious financial crises so that the growth rate over the
long run would not be lower, and it would certainly be less variable.
Monetary policy implications
The long run implications for monetary policy of these changes are not obvious. It is
likely that the link between the central bank policy rate and the effective cost of funds in
the economy is affected by policies which make banks safer and the banking sector
smaller. It is plausible that the average effective cost of funds in the economy would be a
larger mark-up over the policy rate set by the central bank. That would be likely if banks
held more equity capital and held more liquid assets, or if there were to be tax reform that
reduced the tax deductibility of interest on debt for companies. So, for several different
reasons we might find the natural short term nominal rate – that is the policy rate set by
13

This is only one reason why growth need not be lower. Another is that the growth rate of the economy
may ultimately be linked to the growth of the labour force and not to investment or saving rates.

13

the central bank – consistent with a particular average rate of inflation was a bit lower.
This would not mean that the effective real interest rate in the economy was lower. But it
is something the central bank would want to take into account in setting its rate.
In the short run, substitutes to bank lending to those who have relied heavily upon it are
likely to be limited; and the puncturing of the optimism about growth and asset values
that came with the banking crisis may have overshot with the potential to become selffulfilling. So policy needs to help the transition to a new world where banks are less
important and simultaneously try to prevent the recession worsening and have inflation
dip persistently below the target level. Quantitative easing – QE – facilitates this by
making it easier for non-financial companies to issue equity and debt – something which
naturally happens as investors who have sold gilts to the Bank of England look to replace
them with assets that are close substitutes. That does two things: it raises the demand for,
and the prices of, corporate equity and corporate bonds; and it encourages issuance.
Since QE began corporate bond spreads have fallen sharply; for both investment grade
and non-investment grade bonds, to their lowest levels since September 2008 (Chart 8).
And since the beginning of the QE policy the FTSE All Share Index has increased by
about 45% (Chart 9).
Chart 8: UK Corporate Bond Spreads
Basis
points

Chart 9: UK Equity Price Indices
Basis
points

3500

FT SE All Share
FT SE 100
FT SE 250
FT SE Small Cap

1000

% change since
March 1st
90
80

3000
70

800
2500

Non-investment
grade (lhs)

60

600

2000

40

Investment
grade (rhs)

1500

50

400

30

1000

20

200
500

10

Jan
2006

0

0

0
Jan
07

Jan
08

Jan-09

Jan
09

*Source: Bank of England, Merrill Lynch. Calculated as the Optionadjusted spread over government rates. Investment grade is an
aggregate index of bonds rated BBB3 or higher. Non-investment
grade is an index of bonds rated lower than BBB3.

14

Apr-09

*Source: Bank of England.

Jul-09

Oct-09

-10

Falling corporate bond spreads and rising stock prices have encouraged companies to
raise funds in the capital markets. Cumulative corporate bond and equity issuance in
2009 has been much stronger than on average during 2003-2008 (Chart 10). However,
net external finance raised by PNFCs has been weak. Since the beginning of 2009 UK
PNFCs have repaid £45.2bn of debt with UK MFIs, while total net capital market
issuance has been £38.4bn (Chart 11).
I believe that QE has helped PNFCs become less reliant on bank debt. While it is larger
firms that access the capital markets, this may have made it easier than it otherwise would
be for smaller firms to access bank credit. In the absence of QE this adjustment would
have been more difficult, and companies may have reduced spending by even more in
order to reduce their reliance on banks.
This process is part of a necessary adjustment that may well have a good way to go.
Because QE helps it, and reduces the risk of undershooting the inflation target, I believe
it to be effective. That is why I have voted in recent months for its extension.
Chart 10: Gross Corporate Bond and

Chart 11: Net External Finance Raised by

Equity Issuance by PNFC’s

PNFCs
Cumulative Issuance since
beginning of the year, (£bns)

Borrowing from MFIs

T hree-month rolling sum,
£bns)

Net Capital Market Issuance
Net External Finance Raised

45

40

40

Equity Issuance
in 2009
Bond Issuance

Average
2003 -2008

30

35
30

20

25

10

20

0

15

-10
10
Average
2003-2008

-20

5

-30

0
Jan

Apr

Jul

2005

Oct

*Source: Bank of England, Monetary and Financial Statistics

2006

2007

2008

2009

*Source: Bank of England, Monetary and Financial Statistics

Thinking through the way ahead
We have been through a banking crisis. This has prompted fundamental questioning of
the role of banks. That is a healthy response. Right now there is an explosion of

15

analysis, commentary and opinion on all this – from governments, bankers, regulators,
academics, journalists. That was true in the aftermath of the 1929 crash that led to the
establishment of the Macmillan Committee. I want to end by quoting again from the
Report of that Committee. I should say that the members of the Committee formed a
diverse group. The two leading members were Keynes and Ernest Bevin, then head of
the TGWU and future Foreign Secretary. Two people with more different backgrounds
than Bevin and Keynes it is hard to imagine: Keynes, the Etonian whose father was a
Cambridge academic; Bevin, the illegitimate son of a labourer who never knew his
father, was orphaned at 8, left school at 11 and then worked as a farm labourer. Bevin
later recalled being asked as a child to read the newspaper aloud for the benefit of adults
in what remained of his family and who were illiterate, something we can be sure John
Maynard Keynes was never called upon to do.
Keynes and Bevin became allies on that Committee. But when one reads the report it is
the voice of Keynes that comes through very clearly:
“Another difficulty besetting our task has been due to the complexity, not to say mystery,
in which the problems of finance are involved…. It is no exaggeration to say that to the
vast majority even of intelligent people the principles of finance and the theory of money
are a closed book. When we turn to the experts for enlightenment we find that they fall
into two classes. On the one hand we have those who are engaged in the practical
business of banking….On the other we have the theoretical economists who as observers
and critics endeavour to expound the rationale of that system. Between these two classes
of experts…a certain antagonism is inevitable. The practical man finds in his office that
he has to deal with a world ruled not by principles but by compromises and is impatient
of the formulas of the study which he generally fails to comprehend. Indeed the epithets
“academic”, “theoretical”, “doctrinaire”, commonly applied to the philosophic thinker,
have acquired a derogatory innuendo in the parlance of a nation which prides itself on its
practical common sense and has an innate distrust of intellectual cleverness”.
Keynes had a great deal of intellectual cleverness and he also had courage and enormous
determination, and so did Ernest Bevin. They were both certainly willing to respond to
the economic crises they saw by advocating a radically different direction to policy.
When thinking about the role of banks as we emerge from this crisis I believe we should
do the same. The result of pursuing policies that significantly reduce the chances of
16

another banking crisis like the one we have seen is likely to be a smaller banking sector.
That is something that creates transitional problems, but it is not something we should
seek to avoid.

17

