Bank of England

Mark Carney, Governor - Press Conference
24th October 2013

Page 2
Mark Carney, Governor Press Conference - 24-10-13

Nils Blythe:

So good evening everyone and welcome to this short press
conference. As always I would ask you if you could identify
yourself and your organisation as you ask the question, partly
for people who are not in the room. We’ve got about 15
minutes so who would like to ask the first question? Ed, I
think you had your hand up first.

Ed Conway, Sky News:

Governor, you very elegantly avoided saying anything about,
for instance, GDP numbers that are coming out tomorrow, but
there's a lot of focus on the broader economy as well as the
financial system. How would you characterise where we are
at the moment? Do you feel that, for instance, the economy
is turning a corner or are you concerned about the path of
growth at the moment?

Mark Carney, Governor:

Well the economy obviously has picked up over the last
couple of quarters. We expect the second half to be stronger
than the first half, as indicated in our minutes that came our
earlier this week. We’ll find out, I mean I'm not so foolish to
try to give a prediction of a number that’s going to come out
in less than 24 hours, so why don’t we wait for the GDP
report, which undoubtedly will be revised over time.
But what we’re seeing is that the rate of growth in the UK is
towards the top end of the advanced economies, but it’s
coming from a very low base. The balance of that growth by
components, is weighted more heavily towards the household
sector at this stage. Investment is still relatively modest and
the net export side is challenged. So we take some
encouragement from what we’re seeing, but it’s a long way
back from where we’ve been.

David Smith, Sunday Times:

Governor, we’ve had a series of high profile announcements
of energy price increases recently, and that seems to have
been reflected in a rise in general inflation expectations. We
had the Citi-YouGov survey out this afternoon which shows

Page 3
Mark Carney, Governor Press Conference - 24-10-13

quite a sharp rise. Does that concern you, that these high
profile price rises may be influencing expectations about
inflation more generally?
Mark Carney, Governor:

Well a couple of things. We’re going to talk maybe
specifically about the indicator you referenced; the City
YouGov, which I think was surveyed just in the last couple of
days. So the survey was actually when the high profile - and
they were high profile and notable - announcement in energy
price increases happened. And we’ve seen a bit in the past
when you have a coincident survey with something as
obvious and important to people as energy prices move, you
get these spikes. So we have to see on the specific survey
what persistence there is, and fortunately it’s a monthly
survey so we look at that.
I’d generalise it a bit though, is that what we obviously do as
the MPC is we look at, as you know, David, we look at a
range of indicators. Other surveys, whether it’s the Barclays
Basics, the Bank’s NOP surveys, professional forecasters,
market indicators.

I mean market indicators have not

moved, didn’t move today, haven’t moved over the course of
these energy price increases. I wouldn’t read too much into
that, but they haven’t. And in the run up to our latest
decision we really hadn’t seen any move in inflation
expectations; in fact they'd moderated a bit. If you had to
make the call, we as a group, sort of said we didn’t see
anything notable there.
But, you know, we take note of it and certainly, as we do with
all those indicators regardless of where they break. Let me
say one other thing though on the energy price increases, the
utility price increases, which are significant for some people,
fully recognise that, and come on the heels of other increases
over the years. From an overall consumer price basket
perspective, so the CPI basket, the utility price is a little less

Page 4
Mark Carney, Governor Press Conference - 24-10-13

than 5%. The prices that are coming out are a bit higher
than we had pencilled in, in our last forecast, but all of that
translates to about 15 basis points on inflation next year,
increase.
And subsequent, since we made that forecast, this is relative
to our August forecast, since that forecast there has been a
variety of other things that have moved in the opposite
direction. We’ll give you, obviously in November when we
release our next inflation report, an updated forecast. But
when you net it out, it would appear to be slightly tilted to
the downside in terms of the net outlook for inflation as a
whole, relative to August.
Jennifer Ryan, Bloomberg News:

Ed Balls has called today for the Bank of England to urgently
review Help to Buy. Is that something you’d consider doing?

Mark Carney, Governor:

Well, with respect to that specific programme, as you know
we’ve been asked by the government to review it on an
annual basis, starting from a year from now. But let me put
this in a more general context which is the issue about
sustainability in the housing market, potential issues for
financial stability that could arise from developments in the
housing market whether actual or prospective, something
that is the responsibility of, amongst many others, of the
Financial Policy Committee.
The FPC has to take an assessment of those vulnerabilities.
In the context of that assessment, or those assessments because it’s not just about the next meeting, its subsequent
meetings and beyond - it has to consider whether any action
should be taken. And in that consideration it will take into
account a broad range of tools that are available to it and to
others, that could be used. So it’s certainly not limited to the
terms of one government programme. There are a variety of
ways to address this.

Page 5
Mark Carney, Governor Press Conference - 24-10-13

All of that said, and I hope you'll include this in your report if
you write on it, that is not to say that, is not to presuppose
that any action needs to be taken. I'm not prejudging any
decision of the FPC whether at the next meeting or any
subsequent ones.
Richard Edgar, ITV News:

Governor, are you happy with the distribution of the
economic growth in the country, coming back to Ed’s question
a moment ago?

Mark Carney, Governor:

Yeah, well Richard, I think the - I gave a speech today about
the financial services sector, and one of the points I tried to
make was that there is a broader distribution of the financial
services sector across the UK. But let me go to geographic
distribution. What’s absolutely clear to us at the Bank, and
this is a point that myself and my colleagues have discussed
as we go round the country, is that a recovery that’s just in
the southeast is not ultimately a sustainable recovery for the
UK. So it’s going to turn on the Midlands, it’s going to turn
on what happens in the North, in Scotland. It needs to be
broad; it needs to be a broad recovery to truly be
sustainable.
We’re seeing some broadening in geographic terms of the
recovery. What we have not yet seen is broadening across
the components of GDP away from just a concentration, if
you will, around household expenditures.

Hugh Pym, BBC:

Governor, when you set out forward guidance in August, you
made it pretty clear that you wouldn’t consider a rate rise
until unemployment fell to 7%. And it was pretty implicit that
would not be till 2016 because of the Bank’s projections for
unemployment and assumptions.

Page 6
Mark Carney, Governor Press Conference - 24-10-13

Since then there's been a lot of speculation about 7% being
hit earlier than that, hints I think from an MPC member that
you'll recalibrate your unemployment forecast in November.
And also another member of the MPC saying rates could even
rise next year. What message can you tonight give
households and businesses about the likely timing of a rate
rise?
Mark Carney, Governor:

Well I agree with the first sentence in your question, which
was we made it pretty clear that we wouldn’t consider raising
interest rates until unemployment reached 7%. I don’t agree
with the second part of your question which went into a
specific calendar.
Now what we tried to do when we released guidance was to
give as much information as we could about the probabilities
over which the threshold could be achieved. So there were
relative probabilities - whether it was 2016, 2015, 2014 - that
that 7% threshold could be achieved.
And what we have seen since then has been the economy has
been a little stronger, which is welcome. More jobs have
been created than we had expected, which is also welcome.
Inflation has edged down as broadly as we would have
expected; inflation expectations have held.
And the message to households, to businesses, is that the
recovery has obviously begun, it is strengthening, but we are
not going to withdraw monetary stimulus until it’s really
gained that traction. And we’re using the 7% unemployment
threshold, something you report, everyone in this room
reports the unemployment rate when it comes out, something
that matters to people across the country, these are real
people, real jobs, real people looking for jobs. We’re using
that as the staging post for when we reassess monetary
policy and begin to think about raising interest rates.

Page 7
Mark Carney, Governor Press Conference - 24-10-13

So look, if we make it there faster because the economy is
growing more rapidly, because more jobs are being created,
we will then assess - make that assessment - more rapidly in
time. But it’s about conditions. It’s not about a calendar.
Larry Elliott, The Guardian:

Governor, how can you explain the fact that the recovery,
such as it is, seems to be driven by the household sector, yet
real wages are going down?

Mark Carney, Governor:

Well there are a couple of things. There has been an
adjustment, Larry, as you probably know, in the savings rate.
I mean that data is always somewhat imperfect, whether it’s
here or US or anywhere else. But there has been a step
down in the rate of savings of households over the last couple
of quarters. So there's that adjustment. There are more
people in work so that helps as well, so more people are
actually earning a wage than were before. And what there
hasn’t been has been a sharp uptake in borrowing.
In our forecast in August - obviously we’ll update it in a few
weeks, but in our forecast in August - we didn’t see consumer
borrowing picking up, borrowing for consumption picking up.
We saw consumption growth largely in line with income
growth, and income growth being relatively modest, as you
say. So that’s one of the reasons why, despite the fact that
the UK economy is still just coming back to its level in 2008,
growth, while it’s improved, while it’s strengthened, is still
relatively modest relative to historic recovery. So the rate in
historic recoveries because we don’t see that expansion in
incomes, and the constraint on the growth of consumption is
more about the growth of incomes.
And I’ll make one last point if I may, just to complete it,
which is this one of the many reasons why it matters what
happens to productivity, because our view is that ultimately

Page 8
Mark Carney, Governor Press Conference - 24-10-13

that real growth in incomes is going to come if productivity
starts to pick up more rapidly. We’ve only seen the initial
signs of that.
Chris Giles, Financial Times:

Governor, in your speech you said the Bank of England was
now open for business in terms of its liquidity operations.
Should we now fear that banks might hear those words and
start taking excessive risks again?

Mark Carney, Governor:

Well it’s a fair question, I think, and let me answer it in two
ways. One is why do we feel it necessary to say that? And
the answer is that there is a stigma that develops in terms of
using central bank facilities. And there are certain classes of
central bank facilities. There's emergency lending, which
sounds exactly like it is, for individual institutions. I didn’t
talk about that today. But then there are the regular
facilities, as you know, of the central bank, that are there to
be used.
And the point we’re making is that as markets develop, as
collateral becomes more and more important to market
functioning - we the regulators, by the way, are making it
more important to market functioning, but it’s also some of
the lessons of the crisis - as that becomes more important
those collateral markets in the management of collateral will
become more important. And the ability, the central bank
can play a role in ensuring that those markets are always
there. And that’s so that when there's a shock to those
markets, firms have an alternative which is run on a
competitive auction based to reach to the central bank.
The last point that I’ll make in terms of your question, the
core of your question, is this isn’t happening in isolation, the
change to the liquidity facilities. In fact the prerequisite for
change in the liquidity facilities was much tougher liquidity
regulation. In fact really for the first time true regulation,

Page 9
Mark Carney, Governor Press Conference - 24-10-13

supervision, active supervision of liquidity at banks. And
that’s what we’ve been doing. And partly as a consequence
there has been a substantial increase of actual liquidity at
banks.
Our job, and you'll hold us to account I'm sure, as others will,
is to make sure that that is still the case three years, five
years, ten years down the road.
Juliet Samuel, The Times:

You endorsed Funding for Lending. I wondered if you would
endorse Help to Buy, and if you worry that it’s exacerbating
this sort of move away from rebalancing the economy and
concentrating activity and credit in the housing market, which
has traditionally been a huge part of the economy.

Mark Carney, Governor:

Well Funding for Lending is a Bank of England policy. The
other is not a policy of the Bank of England. I think there is
an appropriate separation between our policies and the
policies of a government, whatever government exists. And
we have to be very careful about crossing those boundaries.
We take government fiscal policy as given. We take
government housing policy as given. And then we optimise,
within our responsibilities, given those decisions that elected
governments take.
I think what I’ll say about Help to Buy is that it is very
welcome that the FPC has an opportunity to review the terms
of Help to Buy on an annual basis. And I’ll refer back to my
answer, I guess, to Jennifer, of the fact that the FPC has
many other tools that it could use, if it were to decide that
there were issues in the housing market that needed to be
addressed.

Nils Blythe:

We’ve probably got time for just one more. I know Ben has
had his hand up for a long time.

Page 10
Mark Carney, Governor Press Conference - 24-10-13

Ben Chu, The Independent:

Governor, many people would have been struck by the
contrast between the tone of your speech tonight in regard to
the City of London, and that of your predecessor. Is this a
new start for the Bank of England in relation to the City? And
do you think it’s part of the job of the Governor of the Bank
of England to be a cheerleader and a promoter of the
activities of the City of London?

Mark Carney, Governor:

No, well let me deal with the second bit. No, it’s not part of
the job of the Governor and we’re not cheerleading for the
City. That’s not what this is. The point is to recognise a
couple of facts. London is a global financial centre. Financial
services are incredibly important to the UK economy. It’s
more than just about London; it spreads across the economy.
London serves a role, and the UK serves a role in maintaining
an open global system. The only way that we can continue to
do so, and responsibly do so, is to organise the system both
on the banking side and on the market side, for resilience.
And that requires a bunch of reforms.
If we don’t end ‘too big to fail’, if we don’t accomplish some of
the things that I set out, and more, in that speech I made on
‘too big to fail’, we cannot support a financial sector of the
size we have, let alone one that grows. If we don’t make a
series, in our opinion, of reforms to the way core funding and
derivative markets work, then we shouldn’t have those
markets of the size they are in the UK because of the ultimate
risk that would come back here. And we have a role to play,
both in the design and implementation of those reforms, as
well as in the plumbing of central banking and the provision
of liquidity.
But let me say something about where this situates relative
to what the Bank has been doing before. Lord King and I
worked very closely in our previous roles on a number of
these reforms. And domestically a number of things that the

Page 11
Mark Carney, Governor Press Conference - 24-10-13

Bank of England and that Lord King personally led, have set
the stage to have a speech like today’s, to talk about some of
the initiatives that I raised today.
Until the domestic banking system had been fixed, the
recapitalisation had happened, we couldn’t be here. Some of
the structural measures that have been put in place, whether
it’s through ICB which he helped catalyse, we couldn’t be
here because they’re part of solving ‘too big to fail’, some of
the compensation initiatives, the cultural issues and others
that Lord King put in place. But the point is to what end?
Once that is there, we still have a global financial system
that’s here, that’s important for all the reasons I referenced.
And how do we then sustainably maintain it?
The Bank’s role is to figure out the prudential aspects of that
equation which we will do here domestically, but importantly
internationally through the FSB. What the City does with it,
what the broader financial services industry across the
country does in that context, is entirely up to them. And we
leave it in - I’ll just leave it to that actually, yeah.
Nils Blythe:

Well I'm afraid we really are out of time. So thank you all
very much indeed for coming, and I hope it has been worth
your while.

Mark Carney, Governor:
END

Okay, thank you.

