“The Meaning of Internal Balance” Thirty Years On
Speech given by
Charles Bean, Chief Economist and Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of
England

At the James Meade Centenary Conference
13 July 2007

I am grateful for the helpful suggestions of Kalin Nikolov, James Proudman, Tim Taylor, Peter
Westaway and Tony Yates. The views expressed are those of the author and do not reflect those of
either the Bank of England or the Monetary Policy Committee.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Abstract
In his Nobel Prize lecture, Meade laid out a macroeconomic programme based on the
principle of allocating demand management policies to the pursuit of price stability,
reformed wage-fixing institutions to achieving full employment, and foreign exchange
policies to maintaining balance-of-payments equilibrium. But with respect to the first
of these, he advocated the pursuit of a target for nominal income, rather than the price
level. I evaluate this programme with the benefit of hindsight and in the light of the
successful application of inflation targets in many countries, including the United
Kingdom. I consider why an inflation target is typically preferred to a nominal
income target and note that a “flexible” inflation target overcomes Meade’s primary
objection to a price level target. I discuss some of the issues associated with the
application of flexibility in practice, as well as the extent to which financial stability
considerations should affect the conduct of monetary policy.
JEL Classification: E52, E58, E44
Key Words: Internal balance, monetary policy, nominal income target, inflation target.

2

1

Introduction

2007 is not only the centenary of James Meade’s birth, but it also marks exactly thirty
years since he and Bertil Ohlin received the Nobel Prize for their “pathbreaking
contribution to the theory of international trade and international capital movements.”
The award recognised Meade’s analysis of trade policy in a world with various
market distortions as well as his pioneering work on open-economy macroeconomics.
In this regard, Meade's analysis of the relation between internal and external balance,
and the relation between targets and instruments of economic policy, was of particular
importance.
It was therefore somewhat surprising that in his Prize address, “The Meaning of
Internal Balance” (Meade, 1978; henceforth MIB), Meade chose to focus not on openeconomy issues but how to define, and more particularly how to achieve, internal
balance in an economy. But it is characteristic of Meade’s modesty that he chose to
dwell not on his achievements, but rather on where he felt his earlier work had been
deficient.
Meade’s Balance of Payments (Meade, 1951), one of the two key works which gained
him the Nobel Prize1, employed a standard Keynesian fixed-price income-expenditure
framework, transplanted to an open economy setting. A key focus of interest was
how an economy could simultaneously achieve balance-of-payments equilibrium
(external balance) and full employment (internal balance). In a nutshell, that was to
be

achieved

by

a

combination

of

demand

management

(expenditure

increasing/reducing policies) and foreign exchange policies (expenditure switching).
At the time, and following the General Theory, Meade felt that nominal wage and
price rigidity was an acceptable assumption to make for short-run analysis. The
development of the Phillips curve allowed subsequent analysis to endogenise wages
and prices, but the analysis and control of inflation remained something of a sideshow
to the main event.

But following Friedman’s 1967 presidential address to the

American Economic Association (Friedman, 1968) and associated work by Phelps
1

The other is Trade and Welfare (Meade, 1955).

3

(1967) and Lucas (1973), and more particularly reflecting the widespread emergence
of stagflation in the 1970s – which the United Kingdom suffered from especially
badly – it was clear that inflation needed to be properly integrated into the picture. In
MIB, Meade recognised this deficiency in his earlier work and noted that policy
makers needed to seek to achieve price stability, as well as full employment and
balance-of-payments equilibrium.
How was this to be achieved? Achieving three targets in general requires three
instruments and Meade identified demand management (fiscal and monetary policies),
wage-fixing and foreign exchange policies as the tools required for the job. But what
was more interesting – and for that time more novel – was the particular allocation of
these instruments to targets, namely:
•

Demand management to control total money (rather than real) expenditure
and thus to achieve price stability;

•

Wage-fixing institutions to ensure that wages moved to match the demand for
labour to the available supply (rather than to control inflation as in traditional
incomes policies) and thus to achieve full employment;

•

And foreign exchange policy to maintain balance-of-payments equilibrium.

In MIB, Meade then went on to elaborate on this assigment of instruments to targets
and a host of issues connected with its implementation. But there were so many
details to be filled in that it occupied a large team – including the organisers of this
conference and one of my division heads – at Cambridge for more than a decade, and
led to four books (Meade, 1982; Meade et al., 1983; Meade, 1986; and Meade et al.,
1989), as well as a host of articles. On a personal note, it also provided the stimulus
for part of my own PhD thesis (Bean, 1983).
Seen with thirty years hindsight, it is notable how much of the essence of Meade’s
thinking is embodied in the current macroeconomic policy framework. But, not
altogether surprisingly, there are important ways in which it differs. So in the rest of
my contribution, I shall explore in more depth what has survived and what has not, as
well as considering some unresolved issues associated with the current policy
framework. As befits a central banker, I shall focus on the demand management

4

aspects of Meade’s policy programme, though I shall conclude with a few
observations on the wage-fixing and foreign exchange elements.

2

Demand Management

The Policy Assignment
A key feature of Meade’s programme was the assignment of demand management
policies to the control of nominal spending and inflation, rather than to the level of
real activity and employment, which were instead to be pursued through reform of the
institutions determining wages. That is very much the consensus approach to policy
today and reflects the belief that while temporary wage and price rigidities or sluggish
expectations could create a trade-off between activity and inflation in the short run,
that trade-off cannot be systematically exploited to run the economy above the
‘natural’ level of output that would prevail once wages, prices and expectations had
adjusted. It is, though, the reverse of the assignment prevailing in the 1960s and
1970s
Why does this long-run neutrality of inflation for output lead naturally to Meade’s
(and the current) assignment of instruments to targets? It is not because the traditional
assignment could not work in principle. The level of wages could be set to generate
some predetermined inflation rate and macroeconomic policies then set to achieve
what is believed to be the natural rate of output conditional on that inflation path. In
essence, one would be just solving a pair of simultaneous equations for two
unknowns.
The problem comes when the policy maker’s assessment of the natural rate of output
is wrong. If, for instance, it is too optimistic – as was effectively the case in the
United Kingdom through the much of the 1960s and especially the 1970s – then there
will be upward pressure on wages and prices relative to that generated by the policy
for wages and prices. Though the latter might hold for a while, experience suggests
that such prices and incomes policies would eventually need either to accommodate

5

that higher required inflation rate or else collapse. And so long as the target for
output was too high, there would be a tendency for inflation to keep on ratcheting up.
Meade’s assignment prevents this happening. In deciding the target for the rate of
growth of nominal spending, the policy maker would need to take a view on the rate
of growth of the natural level of output.

But if (s)he is too optimistic, the

consequence would be higher inflation than intended, but no tendency for it to
continue to accelerate. So the assignment is potentially more robust to errors in
implementation. Moreover, it helps to emphasise to the public that ultimately the
level of activity is determined by real factors and cannot be affected in the long run by
trying to manipulate the level of nominal demand alone.
The argument here is very similar to that embodied in the literature on the time
inconsistency of monetary policy developed by Kydland and Prescott (1977) and
Barro and Gordon (1983). But in those models, an inflationary bias arises because
distortions, associated with the exertion of monopoly power in product and labour
markets, lead the policy maker’s target for output to exceed its natural rate.

Fiscal or monetary policy?
One aspect in which Meade’s assignment differs from contemporary practice is in the
roles played by fiscal and monetary policies. In MIB, Meade noted that if the velocity
of circulation were stable, then a steady rate of expansion of nominal demand could
be achieved through a steady rate of growth of the money supply. In turn that could
be delegated to an independent central bank – an idea that he found attractive – with a
constitutional requirement to aim to achieve steady but moderate growth in nominal
income. However, instability in the velocity of circulation – and remember this was
before the experiment of monetary targeting in the 1980s had been derailed by shifts
in velocity associated with financial market innovation – persuaded him that monetary
policy, i.e. interest rates, should be used to directly target nominal income and that
this should be supplemented by the use of fiscal policy, i.e. the use of two instruments
to hit one target.

6

That one might want to use more than one instrument to try to hit a single target can
be rationalised by uncertainty about the impact of each instrument on the goal
variable. With multiple instruments, one can increase the precision of control by
diversifying across instruments, placing more weight on those instruments whose
impact is felt to be more certain, as well as exploiting any covariances between policy
multipliers (Brainard, 1967). Meade’s analysis was rather different though. He noted
that what sort of fiscal action was called for depended on the nature of the shock – he
gave the example of an adverse terms-of-trade shock that necessitated a fall in real
consumption in the home economy – and that therefore the best model was probably
to let the fiscal authority, which he did not think should also be independent, set fiscal
policy in the light of circumstances, knowing that the central bank would then set
monetary policy to maintain nominal demand at its desired level.
This is pretty much the arrangement that we do have, with the important proviso that
monetary policy is seen as the primary tool for managing nominal demand. Interest
rates are a flexible tool that can be changed instantaneously, though the transmission
lags to demand and thence to inflation are certainly, in Friedman’s famous phrase,
“long and variable” (to which I would also add ‘rather uncertain’).
Fiscal policy is, by contrast, these days seen as a less effective weapon. Increases in
government spending take time to initiate. And temporary changes in income taxes
are likely to be ineffective in stimulating or retarding demand, at least if consumers
obey the life-cycle/permanent income hypothesis. Temporary variations in sales taxes
or investment credits could be used as a countercyclical fiscal tool, as they potentially
induce intertemporal substitution in spending, though these too are not regarded as a
central part of the armoury. That is because all fiscal expansions, whether as result of
higher spending or lower taxes, tend to be politically hard to reverse. For that reason,
the conventional wisdom has for some time been to set fiscal policy with an eye to the
medium to long-term, ensuring that budget deficits are purely temporary phenomena
reflecting unusual events, e.g. cyclical downturns or wars, and matched by
appropriate surpluses in the good times.

7

Central bank independence
MIB does not expand in detail on the case for an independent central bank. At the
time, it was a relatively unusual position to take, though now it can be taken as
representing the conventional wisdom, both in academia and more generally. Much
of the impetus to academic thinking came from the work of Kydland and Prescott
(1977) and Barro and Gordon (1983) mentioned earlier, as well as that of Rogoff
(1985), who showed how delegation to a ‘conservative’ central bank could reduce the
inflation bias and raise social welfare. Subsequent work has explored alternative
ways of achieving the same end through mechanisms such as performance-related
contracts, which provide the monetary policy maker with an incentive to offset any
inflation bias.
Interesting though this literature may be, in my view it was the better comparative
performance of countries with independent central banks, such as the United States
and Germany, coupled with an appreciation that delegation of monetary policy would
allow the Chancellor and the Treasury to focus on fiscal and structural issues, that
provided the main impetus behind the decision to give the Bank of England
operational independence in 1997. And given the relatively good performance since
then, with inflation generally close to target and relatively steady growth, support for
independence has if anything strengthened.
There are, however, also degrees of independence. The Bank of England has just
operational independence; our target – 2% CPI inflation at all times – is given to us by
the Chancellor each year. Other central banks, such as the European Central Bank
(ECB) and the Federal Reserve have more latitude in setting their own objective
within their general legal mandate. I think Meade would have approved of the UK
arrangement, as it helps to reduce the likelihood of unco-ordinated decision making
by the Bank and the Treasury leading to a sub-optimal policy mix. If the Bank had
freedom to set its own goal, there is always some possibility that it would differ from
that of the Treasury. If the Bank (Treasury) then sets monetary (fiscal) policy treating
the policy setting of the other agency as given, the resulting Nash equilibrium is
inefficient. But the Chancellor presumably sets us an objective that is consistent with
the Government’s, so that misalignment of objectives is impossible; the Treasury sets
8

fiscal policy, knowing that the MPC will then adjust monetary policy to keep inflation
at the target.2

Under such circumstances, the outcome of such unco-ordinated

decision-making will be optimal from the perspective of the former, at least so long as
we share the same assessment of the economic conjuncture and of the short-run
output-inflation trade-off (see Bhundia and O’Donnell, 2002).
It is worth noting that there are intrinsic limitations to just how independent a central
bank can be. The Government’s intertemporal budget constraint ensures that fiscal
policy and monetary policy are necessarily tied together in a long-run sense. And
there are some circumstances where the involvement of the finance ministry would be
essential – for instance in a deflationary situation, when official interest rates are at
their zero lower bound and recourse is being made to ‘unconventional’ expansionary
monetary operations in bonds and equities. Finally and most fundamentally, central
bank independence can only survive if it retains the support of the country’s citizens.
It can best foster that through demonstrating competence in achieving its given
objective and avoiding straying into territory that does not fall within its mandate.
See Buiter (2006) for more on these, and related, issues.

Nominal income v inflation targets
An obvious divergence between Meade’s programme and current practice is that the
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has been given a target for consumer price
inflation, not total money spending. Indeed, there are at least 22 central banks around
the world that have explicit inflation targets and a number of others, such as the ECB,
which have something that looks like an inflation target even if they do not describe
themselves as inflation targeters. The chosen regime for those central banks which do
not have an inflation target is usually some form of exchange rate target – most often
in small, open economies. To my knowledge, no central bank has ever formally
pursued a nominal income target.
In MIB, despite having declared that price stability should be one of the two
components of internal balance, Meade argues that
2

In the jargon of game theory, the Treasury is a Stackelberg leader and the Bank is a Stackelberg
follower.

9

“to make price stability itself the objective of demand management would be
very dangerous. If there were upward pressure on prices because the prices of
imports had risen or indirect taxes had been raised, the maintenance of price
stability would require an offsetting absolute reduction in money wage costs;
and who knows what levels of depression and unemployment it might be
necessary consciously to engineer in order to achieve such a result?”
He goes on to observe that
“this particular danger might be avoided by choice of a price index for
stabilisation which excluded both indirect taxes and the price of imports; but
even so, the stabilisation of such a price index would be very dangerous. If
any remodelled wage-fixing arrangements were not working perfectly…a very
moderate excessive upward pressure on money wage rates and so on costs
might cause a very great reduction in output and employment if…the whole of
the impact were taken on profit margins. If, however, it was total money
incomes which were stabilised, a much more moderate decline in employment
combined with a moderate rise in prices would serve to maintain the
uninflated total of money incomes.”
The argument here is quite straightforward.

While nominal income and

price/inflation targets should lead to identical interest rate decisions in the face of
shocks that affect only the level of demand, they potentially have different
implications for behaviour in the face of shocks to supply, with nominal income
targets being more ‘forgiving’ than an inflation target. In Meade’s example – a
deterioration in the terms of trade or a rise in indirect taxes – trying to stabilise
consumer prices would require falls in both the money wage and the price of domestic
value added. And even if the target were for the price of domestic value added, any
resistance by workers to the requisite fall in the real consumption wage would have to
be reflected entirely in lower output, rather than a combination of higher prices and
lower output as would happen under a nominal income target. So intuitively, Meade
felt a nominal income target would have better operating properties in the face of
supply disturbances.

10

Indeed, in the case of some sorts of supply shock, a nominal income target would
actually generate an optimal outcome. Specifically, if labour supply is inelastic, then
a labour-augmenting productivity shock which raises the output of a given quantity of
labour by x% requires an x% increase in both the real wage and output in equilibrium.
If nominal wages are pre-set and output prices are flexible, that can be achieved
through an x% fall in the price level, leaving nominal income unchanged (Bean,
1983). But in more general settings and with arbitrary types of supply shock, neither
a nominal income nor an inflation target would ensure that output was always at its
‘natural’ level associated with fully flexible wages and prices.
So why is an inflation target the chosen regime for so many countries? And why are
nominal income targets conspicuous by their absence?

The answer is, I think,

twofold. First, the choice between a nominal income target and an inflation target is
an artificial dichotomy. Given that neither generally delivers the optimal outcome,
why should the policy choice be so restricted? Why not adopt a more flexible
approach? That is exactly what inflation targeting as it is actually practised does.
Second, an inflation target has some practical advantages over a nominal income
target, particularly in terms of the likely impact on inflation expectations.
All inflation targeting central banks pursue ‘flexible’ inflation targets, in which there
is ‘constrained discretion’ in choosing how to respond to supply shocks of the sort
considered above and in how quickly to correct any deviation from target (King,
1997). Although the Chancellor’s Remit to the MPC says that our target is to achieve
2% CPI inflation “at all times”, it goes on to recognise “that the actual inflation rate
will on occasions depart from its target as a result of shocks and disturbances.
Attempts to keep inflation at the inflation target in these circumstances may cause
undesirable volatility in output.”
Indeed, Svensson and Woodford have argued that optimal monetary policy can be
implemented through a regime of flexible inflation targets (Svensson, 2003a; and
Svensson and Woodford, 2005). Contemporary discussion of macroeconomic policy
issues is dominated by the New Keynesian/New Classical Synthesis approach that
recasts traditional Keynesian macroeconomic thinking in a setting with explicit microfoundations. On the demand side, consumers are intertemporal optimisers, follow the
11

life-cycle/permanent income hypothesis and have Dixit-Stiglitz preferences for
individual goods. On the supply side, monopolistically competitive firms use labour
to produce those goods, charging a price that reflects the elasticity of demand.
However, those prices can only be changed periodically, with a random fraction of
firms getting the chance to re-set their prices each period.
A log-linearised representation of the demand side is given by:
(1)

xt = Etxt+1 – rt/σ + vt,

where: xt is the deviation of output from its flexible-price, or natural, level, i.e. the
output gap; rt is the deviation of the (expected) real interest rate from the flexibleprice, or natural, real interest rate; and vt is an aggregate demand shock. This is
essentially the intertemporal optimality condition characterising the representative
household’s optimal consumption path.
The supply side is correspondingly given by a New Keynesian Phillips curve:
(2)

πt = βEtπt+1 + κxt + ut,

where: πt is the deviation of inflation from target; β is a discount factor that is close to
unity; and ut is a supply (strictly a mark-up) shock. This relationship reflects the
pricing behaviour of firms; firms only get the opportunity to change their price
periodically, so the price they set will reflect future cost and demand conditions.
The social welfare function is assumed to be given by the expected discounted loss:
k=∞

(3)

Lt = (1-β)Et[ ∑ βk(πt+k2 + λxt+k2)/2].
k=0

Because of the presence of expectational variables in equation (1) and equation (2),
the optimal policy depends on whether or not the central bank can commit to follow a
particular monetary strategy. When it cannot pre-commit, the optimal policy satisfies
the first-order condition:
(4)

πt = – (λ/κ)xt.

12

Thus policy should ‘lean against the wind’ in the event of supply shocks, but demand
shocks should be neutralised.
When the central bank can commit, the optimal policy satisfies instead the set of firstorder conditions, for all k ≥ 0:
(5)

Etπt+k = – (λ/κ)(Etxt+k – Etxt+k-1).

Both equation (4) and equation (5) ensure that inflation will be brought back to target,
but at a rate that recognises the consequences for activity. Svensson has characterised
optimality conditions of this type as describing ‘flexible inflation-forecast targeting’.
Note that the optimal policy in equation (5) is history-dependent, even though there
are no lagged endogenous variables in the model. That is because if there is an
adverse supply shock, the central bank would prefer to get inflation down today by
promising to run an extended period of small output gaps into the future, rather than
having a larger output gap today. Note also that if λ and κ happen to be the same, and
the rate of growth of the natural level of output is constant (an heroic assumption),
then the policy characterised by equation (5) is tantamount to maintaining a constant
rate of growth of nominal income.
In this interpretation, specifying the inflation target involves specifying a ‘high-level’
objective for inflation, leaving the central bank then to apply the policy strategy
(4)/(5) to bring it back to target. One might be tempted to suggest that a ‘high-level’
target for the natural level of output should be specified too. However, the natural
level of output is not known with any certainty. Given the inability of monetary
policy to influence anything other than inflation in the long run, nothing is lost by this
omission as output will gravitate to its unknown natural level in the long-run as
expectations adjust and nominal rigidities work their way out. Moreover, if the
government were to set a ‘high-level’ target for output, it would reintroduce scope for
pressure to manipulate interest rates in order to achieve short-term political ends. The
wording and lexicographic structure of the mandates of both the Bank of England and
the ECB instead help to insulate the central bank from pressures to pursue a more

13

accommodative monetary policy in the short run if that conflicts with keeping
inflation close to target.
Looking at the demand management problem this way does, though, invite the
question as to whether a ‘flexible nominal income target’ would do just as well. After
all, instead of delegating to the MPC the task of achieving a 2% CPI inflation target, if
the average rate of growth of natural level of output were, say, 3%, he could just as
easily have told us to target ‘5% growth in nominal income at all times’3, but given us
the same ‘constrained discretion’ that we employ in pursuing the inflation target. In
that way, we could end up taking exactly the same interest rate decisions.
There are a couple of reasons why I think a flexible inflation target dominates a
flexible nominal income target. First, data on nominal income appears with a lag and
is subject to considerable revision. From the point of view of holding the MPC to
account, having a target measure that is both relatively timely and not revised4 holds
considerable attractions.
Second, and more importantly, inflation in the prices of things that people buy is
something that they recognise. And expected inflation is something that matters both
in determining the level of demand, via the real interest rate, and in the setting of
wages and prices. Indeed, in the sort of New Keynesian model outlined above,
inflation expectations represent the key channel in the monetary transmission
mechanism. By contrast, the expected rate of growth of nominal income is only
relevant indirectly. Now rational agents might have no problem calculating the likely
rate of growth of real income and then working out the implied inflation rate. But
many households and businesses are probably not particularly sophisticated and will
tend to follow simple heuristics in forming their expectations (see King, 2005). In
that case, provided it is credible and well understood, a clear inflation target may help
to anchor private sector inflation expectations more effectively than would a nominal
income target. One of the particular virtues of our current regime is, I believe, the

3

I am assuming for simplicity that the GDP deflator and CPI rise at the same rate. That is not quite
case in practice.
4
The old target measure, RPIX, is never revised. Technically, CPI can be revised if errors are
uncovered or there is new information. But revision is very rare in practice.

14

point nature of the target. This simplicity and clarity should help to anchor private
sector inflation expectations better than having a target range.

Performance under an inflation target: the Great Stability
The importance of keeping inflation expectations anchored cannot be stressed enough.
Inflation in this country has been low, close to target and unusually stable since the
adoption of the inflation target, in marked contrast to our earlier experience. Indeed,
Benati (2006) concludes that the inflation-targeting regime constitutes the most stable
macroeconomic environment in recorded UK history. RPIX inflation has averaged
2.6% under the inflation targeting regime, while CPI inflation has averaged 1.8%5.
The corresponding figures for the period since the MPC was created in June 1997 are
2.4% for RPIX and 1.4% for CPI. Moreover, inflation has been far less variable than
was expected. It took ten years before inflation deviated by more than one percentage
point from the target, thus triggering an Open Letter of explanation from the Governor
to the Chancellor. But calculations at the time the regime was set up had suggested
that such letters were likely to be triggered around 40% of the time (see Bean, 1998)!
This unexpected decline in inflation volatility is documented in Chart 1.
Such stability might just about have been expected if the MPC had behaved not as
flexible inflation targeters, but as – in Mervyn King’s pithy phrase – “inflation
nutters”. But in that case, one might have expected output growth to have been rather
variable, for two reasons. First, the anchoring of inflation expectations at a low level
should tend to flatten the short-run inflation-output trade-off, both because inflation
expectations are less responsive to the current output gap and because price changes
are likely to become less frequent. That indeed appears to be what has happened; see
Chart 2. As a consequence any demand shocks that are not neutralised will have less
effect on inflation, but more effect on output. Second, stabilising inflation involves a
less forgiving response to cost shocks. Given that, the really remarkable thing is how
stable output growth has also been, with 59 quarters of unbroken expansion, the
5

The target was initially defined in terms of RPIX inflation. At inception in October 1992, the target
was specified as a range of 1%-4%; later in the parliament, that was altered to 2.5% or less. In June
1997, it was re-specified as a simple point target of 2.5%. The target measure was switched to CPI
inflation at the end of 2003, with the target itself changed to 2%; on average, CPI inflation has run
about ¾ percentage point below RPIX inflation.

15

longest such run on record. This decline in the volatility of output is documented in
Chart 3. Low and stable inflation coupled with relatively stable growth has been a
characteristic of most developed countries over the past 15 years, but none has
experienced quite such an improvement; see Chart 4.
There are a number of possible causes of this ‘Great Stability’ (also known as the
Great Moderation in the US literature). As well as better monetary policies, these
include smaller and more benign shocks and structural changes that have led to
smoother macroeconomic outturns. As far as the good luck explanation goes, the past
decade does not seem to have been a particularly tranquil period. At a global level, we
have seen: the integration of China, India and the former Communist countries of
Eastern Europe into the world economy; the ICT revolution and the associated
dotcom boom-bust; the emerging-market debt crisis and the collapse of LTCM in
1998; the sharp correction in international equity prices and the associated global
slowdown in 2001; the attacks on the World Trade Centre and subsequent conflicts in
Afghanistan and Iraq; and the tripling of oil prices over the past three years. In
addition, at a domestic level, the MPC has also had to contend with: the effects of the
shocks that led to the 25% rise in sterling between 1996 and 1998 and the tripling in
house prices between 1997 and 2006; ongoing labour market reforms, including the
introduction of a National Minimum Wage; and substantial, and highly uncertain, net
inward migration, particularly from the Accession countries.
Under the heading of possible structural influences, one could include: better
inventory management techniques, which have attenuated the stock cycle; the
transition to a more services dominated economy; and more effective risk-sharing as a
result of financial innovation.

However, most of these have been happening

gradually. So it is difficult to believe that they have been the main drivers behind the
increase in stability.
Turning to the empirical evidence, there are some studies, mainly for the United
States, which suggest that a sizable portion of the improved performance is related to
good luck rather than better policy (e.g. Sims and Zha, 2006; and Stock and Watson,
2003). Some others have suggested that the role of improved policy has been central
(e.g. Clarida, Gali and Gertler, 2000; and Lubik and Schorfheide, 2004). However,
16

those studies which assign a large role to good luck often suffer from a significant
shortcoming in that the demand and supply shocks hitting the economy are typically
identified with the residuals in econometric equations. That ignores the fact that
better monetary policy may itself affect the impact of the true – but in these exercises
unobservable – shocks, thus leading to smaller residuals in the estimated models (see
Bernanke, 2004).
Why might this be? One feature of forward-looking behaviour is that expectations of
future changes in policy do a lot of the work, obviating the need for sharp movements
in the current level of official interest rates. Thus an adverse shock to demand will
lead private agents to expect a reduction in current and future interest rates – provided
the commitment to stabilise inflation is understood – leading to a depreciation of the
exchange rate and a rise in equity prices (compared to what would have been the case
without a policy response). These asset price movements will automatically tend to
stabilise demand.
Possibly more importantly, a well-understood and credible commitment to stabilise
inflation may also reduce the impact of cost shocks. When policy is credible and
inflation expectations are well anchored, then the chance of an adverse supply shock
triggering a wage-price spiral is much less than when people believe that the central
bank will accommodate the shock and allow inflation to rise.

Are there limits to flexibility?
Flexible inflation targets dominate both a strict inflation and a strict nominal income
target. But that does leave open the question of how best to use that ‘constrained
discretion’. One issue is the weight to place on output versus inflation in deciding
how quickly to return inflation to target, i.e. the choice of λ in equation (3). If
equation (3) is thought of as reflecting the efficiency losses associated with nominal
rigidities and the inflation tax on money balances, it can in principle be derived from
the micro-foundations of the model underlying equations (1) and (2); see e.g.
Woodford (2003). In that case, λ could be inferred directly from a calibration of the
underlying model economy.

However, the micro-foundations are of the usual

representative agent variety and ignore the distributional issues associated with the
17

uneven impact of unemployment. So one might feel uncomfortable in applying a λ
derived in this way. But in any case, λ really ought to reflect the preferences of
society.
Now the ‘contract’ between the government and the MPC could be said to be
incomplete in that it doesn't specify what λ is. As noted above, the Remit for the MPC
tells us that we should avoid unnecessary volatility in output, so we know λ must be
non-zero. But that is all. Because of this, Svensson (2003b) has suggested that the
MPC reveal the relative weight it places on deviations of inflation from target and
output from its natural level. But I am not sure this would mean very much to the
public at large. In any case, I believe that public uncertainty about ‘our λ’ is really a
minor issue. In Bean (1998), I argued that a wide range of plausible loss functions
lead to rather similar policy choices (though see also Henry, Satchi and Vines, 2006,
who raise some doubts about the robustness of this result). But more importantly, any
deviation of inflation of more than one percentage point either side of the target
triggers an Open Letter from the Governor to the Chancellor, which amongst other
things is required to say how quickly the MPC plans to bring inflation back to target.
Moreover, the Chancellor’s response to that letter gives him the option of indicating
whether that is too rapid, or not rapid enough.6
Of greater practical importance is how far the flexibility can be used before the central
bank is in danger of losing the beneficial impact on expectations that comes from an
inflation target. This issue is side-stepped in most academic analyses by assuming
rational expectations and that the central bank's reaction function is understood and
credible. But actual policy makers cannot take that for granted. To illustrate this, go
back to Meade's example in MIB of an adverse terms-of-trade shock or an increase in
indirect taxes. Standard New Keynesian reasoning would say that if there are nominal
rigidities in domestic output prices, then the optimal policy is to stabilise the price of
domestic output and thus accommodate the shock by allowing consumer prices to
rise. And, indeed, the tenet that one should accommodate the first-round impact of a

6

In the case of the one Open Letter that has so far been issued, the projected return of inflation to target
was mainly associated with the unwinding of temporary factors. As a consequence this issue did not
arise in a substantive way.

18

terms-of-trade shock or a rise in indirect taxes, but not the second-round effects, does
seem to constitute the conventional wisdom.
In practice, given that we know so little about how expectations are formed and how
credibility is gained and lost, the central bank cannot be sure that private agents will
treat a temporary pickup in inflation meant to accommodate just the first-round effects
of an adverse terms-of-trade shock as just that. The situation is especially difficult if
there are a series of adverse shocks, such as the gradual rise in oil and other
commodity prices that has taken place since early 2004. Is it safe to assume that
private agents will believe that an extended period of higher inflation is just a case of
the central bank accommodating the direct effects of the sequence of jumps in
commodity prices? If there is a chance that private agents will treat the increase in
inflation as a harbinger of raised inflation in the future too, then it probably makes
sense for the central bank to be wary about accommodating even the first-round
effects.
This line of thought also points to the danger of targeting a measure of core inflation
that excludes prices of volatile components, such as oil and food. Such an approach
can be justified on efficiency grounds if the prices that are included are those that are
subject to nominal rigidities, while those that are excluded are relatively flexible. But
if the shocks to the flex-price components are serially correlated, then there is a risk
that the resulting persistent swings in actual inflation will lead to inflation
expectations becoming less well-anchored.

Is price stability enough?
In MIB, Meade elaborated his concept of internal balance to include price stability as
well as full employment as an objective. There are, of course, many other objectives
that a government may have, e.g. achieving a suitable distribution of incomes,
realising a satisfactory pattern of regional development or maintaining global carbon
emissions at an appropriate level.

These are all amenable to a variety of

microeconomic interventions to correct market failures and externalities, but are
largely tangential to the issue of characterising internal balance from a
macroeconomic perspective. But is Meade’s characterisation sufficiently complete?
19

According to one view the answer is No, and one should add the maintenance of
financial stability – understood as the efficient intermediation of funds from lenders to
borrowers – to the list. Moreover, according to some, episodes of financial instability
or disruption can significantly impact on the natural level of output and impose large
welfare loses. In that case, they argue, it is worth directing monetary policy to that
objective, even if it compromises the pursuit of price stability. I stress that I am
talking here about events like: the Great Depression; the aftermath of the collapse of
the Japanese stock market and property bubble; and the (possible) consequences of
the explosion in global credit and asset prices that we have seen in the recent past.
There is no dispute that central banks have a duty to provide emergency liquidity on
demand to ensure the financial markets continue to function efficiently when there is
the threat of a temporary hiatus. Rather the question is whether they should take preemptive action to try to curtail a credit and asset price boom, over and above any
implications it may have for the outlook for inflation, in order to limit the potential
costs when the boom turns to bust.
This view has been associated with the Bank for International Settlements (e.g. Borio
and Lowe, 2002; Borio and White, 2003; see also Bordo and Jeanne, 2002). The
argument runs as follows. Some invention (e.g. the railways, the internet) or just
plain animal spirits sets in train an increase in investment, at least partially financed
by borrowing. Subsequently, excessive optimism about future returns drives up asset
values, prompting increased borrowing to finance further capital accumulation.
Moreover, appreciating asset values raise the value of collateral facilitating the
accumulation of that debt. During the upswing, balance sheets look healthy as the
appreciation in asset values offsets the build-up of debt. But when boom turns to
bust, there is a sharp deterioration in borrowers’ net worth, followed by a tightening in
credit conditions as financial intermediaries react to those stretched balance sheets.
Such a credit crunch is likely to impact on activity more quickly than a conventional
wealth effect and, moreover, temporarily reduce the effectiveness of monetary policy.
Neutralizing the macroeconomic consequences of such financial instability may thus
be difficult to achieve. Moreover, the very success of central banks in achieving the
goal of low inflation and anchoring inflation expectations is argued to have made such
excesses more likely, as they no longer show up so immediately in higher inflation.
20

According to this view, monetary policy should be focussed not just on price stability,
but should seek to prevent credit excesses building up, even if that means inflation
undershooting the target. In principle, that could still be consistent with a suitably
flexible interpretation on the inflation target, if the consequence of sticking to the
target in the short run (i.e. two years or so ahead) is to increase the likelihood of
missing it further out. All that is required is to adopt a longer perspective in decision
making. In that case, an amendment to the formal mandate of an inflation-targeting
central bank is not required, though the rhetoric employed to explain policy may need
to alter; see Bean (2003).
But though the argument that monetary policy makers should factor in the long-term
implications for output and inflation of credit/asset-price boom-busts may appear
persuasive in principle, there are a number of serious practical difficulties in
implementation. First, the policymaker must judge whether the boom is warranted by
the fundamentals or whether it is instead based on misplaced expectations and
furthermore poses a threat to future financial and macroeconomic stability.

A

mechanical response that treats all asset price movements alike, whatever their causes,
is unlikely to be appropriate. Since such boom-busts are apt to occur when the
fundamentals have also improved, that is not likely to be a straightforward task, at
least in the early stages.
Second, once excessive credit/asset-price growth has been diagnosed, the lags in the
monetary transmission mechanism seriously complicate the calibration of an
appropriate policy. Raising official interest rates will be counterproductive if the
boom turns to bust, so that the economy is subject to twin deflationary impulses both
from the asset price collapse and any associated credit crunch, and from the effect of
the policy tightening. Indeed, in the unlikely event that the policymaker knew that an
asset price collapse was imminent, monetary relaxation, rather than tightening, would
be called for.

Gruen, Plumb and Stone (2003) show that the informational

requirements necessary to render an activist policy effective are extreme once lags are
taken into account.

21

Third, a modest increase in interest rates may do little to restrain an asset price boom.
But an increase large enough to materially affect the evolution of asset prices is likely
to have a significant adverse impact on economic activity. So the policy maker would
need to be confident that the short-term costs of such a strategy are outweighed by the
uncertain long-term gains. Moreover, if the key concern is a build-up of debt, higher
interest rates will exacerbate the problem if the increase in debt service outweighs the
reduction in new borrowing. In any case, expectations of future returns are likely to
be a key driver of asset prices, investment and borrowing, so expectations of future
policy actions may be as relevant as current policy settings.
All of these considerations have persuaded many central bankers, most obviously
exemplified by the US Federal Reserve, that monetary policy should remain focused
on achieving low inflation and stable growth, but then act promptly to deal with the
fall-out when the excesses start to unwind (see Bernanke and Gertler, 2001; and
Greenspan, 2002).
Finally, and perhaps most obviously, this is a classic case of trying to achieve two
objectives with one instrument.

If one adds financial stability to the list of

characteristics of internal balance, then it makes sense to look at regulatory and
prudential policies that correct any externalities and market imperfections and which
thus encourage the right behaviour. This is an area where more research and analysis
would be valuable, especially in view of the recent innovations in financial markets
and the development of a variety of complex new financial instruments; see Fisher
and Gai (2005).

3.

Other aspects of Meade’s programme

MIB was farsighted in advocating the allocation of demand management to the
pursuit of price stability and structural policy to the achievement of full employment.
And, of course, one of his key contributions was to recognise that another instrument
would also be necessary to achieve external balance. Current practice deviates from
Meade’s programme instead in the details. I have already discussed why central
banks generally target inflation rather than nominal income. I will conclude with a

22

few brief remarks on Meade’s proposals regarding wage-fixing and achieving external
balance.

Wage-fixing
In MIB, Meade recognised that reform of the institutions of wage-fixing in order to
deliver full employment was potentially an even more demanding task than achieving
price stability through appropriate macroeconomic institutions and policies. Most
importantly, he saw the need for greater emphasis on balancing supply and demand in
each sector of the labour market.

Meade identified five broad approaches:

government edict; corporatist wage-bargaining; increased competition; workers hiring
capital rather than the other way round; and arbitration in which supply-demand
conditions were paramount. His preferred approach was the last.
That he discarded government edict (on the grounds that government lacked the
necessary information) and labour co-operatives (on the grounds that it was only
feasible with small-scale enterprises) as options is unsurprising. More interesting was
his dismissal of both the corporatist approach and the competitive solution, since
some of the smaller European countries have successfully achieved low
unemployment through the corporatist approach, while the United Kingdom has done
the same through the pursuit of a more competitive paradigm.
Meade rejected corporatism on the grounds that, at least in a relatively large country
like the United Kingdom, there were sure to be outsiders who would be excluded.
The idea that corporatism could work in small countries but not in large ones was, of
course, subsequently formulated rigorously by Calmfors and Driffill (1988), though
their argument rests not on the exclusion of some outsiders, but on the reduced
incentive to internalise externalities as bargaining units become more fragmented. In
addition, increased competition in product markets associated with globalisation and
in labour markets associated with increased migration has made corporatist solutions
harder to maintain even in smaller countries.
He dismissed increased reliance on competitive forces on the grounds that monopsony
power was inevitable on the labour-demand side because of increasing returns to
23

scale, while one could not prevent employees combining together to undertake
collective bargaining. Moreover, he thought that it would necessarily lead to reduced
compensation and support for workers who did lose their jobs. Here, he clearly
underestimated the extent to which legislative changes and the shift away from
traditional heavy manufacturing towards services and niche manufacturing would lead
to a fall in UK union density from nearly 60% in 1979 to around 30% today, as well
as the emergence of a more co-operative approach to bargaining on the part of union
leaders. And while he was right to see that there would be downward pressure on
unemployment benefits – and particularly the duration for which they were paid – he
failed to foresee the shift in emphasis that would take place away from providing
financial assistance to those who have lost their jobs, and towards providing support
to those who were actively looking for work – so-called active labour market policies.
But Meade was certainly right to highlight the importance of labour market
institutions in delivering low unemployment, a theme that emerges strongly in the
large literature on European unemployment (see e.g. Blanchard and Wolfers, 2000;
Layard, Nickell and Jackman, 1991; OECD, 1994)

External balance
Though it was Meade’s contributions to the theory of international trade and open
economy macroeconomics that won him the Nobel Prize, little more than a page of
MIB is devoted to the question of achieving external balance.

In the MIB

programme, that task is given to foreign exchange policies. That Meade thought of
foreign exchange policy as something independent from monetary policy is perhaps
not too surprising, given that at the time of writing there were still considerable
obstacles to the free movement of international capital between the developed
economies, let alone with developing economies. Central banks could undertake
foreign exchange intervention to manipulate – or in the UK case, usually prop up –
the value of the currency without immediately needing to alter the stance of monetary
policy.
Today, with very high levels of international capital mobility and a freely floating
exchange rate, sterilised intervention in countries like the United Kingdom is largely
ineffective. Only countries like China, which retain controls on external capital
24

flows, can hope to offset the impact of foreign exchange intervention on domestic
monetary conditions by undertaking offsetting open market operations in domestic
bond markets. In countries with open capital markets, foreign exchange intervention
to support (depress) the currency is only likely to be effective if it is accompanied by
higher (lower) domestic interest rates. But in that case, monetary policy is being
directed to achieving stability in the external value of the currency rather than its
internal purchasing power. Those two objectives will generally conflict, unless some
other instrument is brought into play.
That instrument is provided by policies to affect the level of national savings,
including fiscal policy. At the time Meade was writing, it was still problematic for
countries like the United Kingdom to run a balance of payments deficit for any period
and the international trade and payments data were probably amongst the most
eagerly watched of all macroeconomic statistics. But with open international capital
markets, that is no longer the case and the monthly trade data are of only peripheral
interest. Indeed, the United Kingdom has experienced a deficit on the current account
for most of the period since 1983 without derailing macroeconomic policies (though
other factors have).
These days, the current account deficit is simply seen as the counterpart to the savings
and investment decisions of the private and public sectors, which in turn are driven by
intertemporal considerations, such as the desire to smooth consumption across
temporary fluctuations in income. The external constraint is just the counterpart to
the sum of the household, corporate and public intertemporal budget constraints. In
such a world, it no longer makes sense to think of external balance as something that
needs to hold period by period, though the set of intertemporal budget constraints will
impose restrictions on the feasible time paths of macroeconomic variables, including
the real exchange rate. While MIB does not engage with this issue, subsequent work
by Meade and his collaborators did (Meade et al, 1989).
MIB does, however, contain a brief, but resonant, discussion of the interaction
between the success or failure of policies to maintain internal balance and the
openness of the international trading system. Meade notes that if domestic policies
failed to find a way to combine price stability with full employment, then countries
25

were likely to be drawn to prefer restrictions on cheap imports to exchange rate
depreciation as a way of correcting balance of payments deficits. We are fortunate
that the emergence of China and India into the global market economy has taken place
during a time in which inflation and unemployment – at least outside some of the
larger European economies – have been low. Had that not been the case, then the
pressure to impose restrictions on imports from the developing economies might have
been more intense.

Even so, protectionist pressures have been building up,

particularly in the United States, where the massive current account deficit is often
associated with ‘unfair’ competition from China (including an undervalued renminbi),
rather than the savings and investment decisions of US and foreign citizens and
companies7, as well as the relative attractiveness of US assets to foreign investors.
Think how much worse those pressures would be if US unemployment had been at its
1992 level of 7.5%, rather than its current level of 4.5%!

4

Concluding remarks

Re-reading Meade’s Nobel Prize lecture with the wisdom of hindsight only increases
one’s admiration for one of the most remarkable economists of the twentieth century.
While some of the details of Meade’s programme turned out not to be right, he
correctly identified the importance of assigning monetary policy to the pursuit of price
stability and appropriate reform of labour market institutions to achieving full
employment. Today, many central banks, including the Bank of England, follow an
inflation target rather than a nominal income target, but in a flexible fashion so as to
avoid generating undue volatility in output in the face of cost shocks. But in so doing,
they come closer to what Meade was aiming for in his advocacy of a target for
nominal income. Even so, there are still many practical issues associated with the
practice of inflation targeting that remain to be fully resolved. It will be interesting to
see how practice evolves over the next thirty years.

7

It is also worth noting that while a country can choose its own inflation rate, it cannot necessarily
choose its external balance at any given moment, because that depends on the policy choices of other
countries too.

26

References
Barro, Robert J.; and Gordon, David. (1983) ‘A positive theory of monetary policy in
a natural rate model’, Journal of Political Economy, August, vol. 91(4), pp.589-610.
Bean, Charles R. (1983) ‘Targeting nominal income: An appraisal’, Economic
Journal, December, vol. 93(372), pp.806-819.
Bean, Charles R. (1998) ‘The new UK monetary arrangements: A view from the
literature’, Economic Journal, November, vol. 108(451), pp.1795-1809.
Bean, Charles R. (2003) ‘Asset prices, financial imbalances and monetary policy: Are
inflation targets enough?’ in A. Richards and T. Robinson, eds., Asset Prices and
Monetary Policy. Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia, pp.48-76.
Benati, Luca. (2006) ‘UK monetary regimes and stylised macroeconomic facts’,
Working Paper 290, Bank of England.
Bernanke, Ben S. (2004) ‘The Great Moderation’, Remarks at the meetings of the
Eastern Economic Association, Washington, DC, 20 February.
Bernanke, Ben S.; and Gertler, Mark. (2001) ‘Should central banks respond to
movements in asset prices?’ American Economic Review, May, vol. 91(2), pp.253257.
Bhundia, Ashok; and Augustine O’Donnell. (2002) ‘UK policy co-ordination: The
importance of institutional design’, Fiscal Studies, vol. 23(1), pp. 135-164.
Blanchard, Olivier J.; and Wolfers, Justin. (2000) ‘The role of shocks and institutions
in the rise of European unemployment: The aggregate evidence’, Economic Journal,
March, vol. 110(462), pp.C1-C33.
Bordo, Michael; and Jeanne, Olivier. (2002) ‘Monetary policy and asset prices: Does
benign neglect make sense?’ International Finance, December, vol. 5(2), pp.139-164.
Borio, Claudio; and Lowe, Philip. (2002) ‘Asset prices, financial and monetary
stability: Exploring the nexus’, Working Paper 114, Bank for International
Settlements, Basle.
Borio, Claudio; and White, William. (2003), ‘Whither monetary and financial
stability? The implications of evolving policy regimes’, in Monetary Policy and
Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy. Kansas: Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City, pp.131-212.
Brainard, William. (1967) ‘Uncertainty and the effectiveness of policy’, American
Economic Review, May, vol. 57, pp.411-425.
Buiter, Willem H. (2006) ‘How robust is the new conventional wisdom in monetary
policy?’, mimeo, London School of Economics, June.

27

Calmfors, Lars; and Driffill, John. (1988) ‘Bargaining structure, corporatism and
macroeconomic performance’, Economic Policy, April, vol. 6, pp.13-62.
Clarida, Richard; Gali, Jordi; and Gertler, Mark. (2000), ‘Monetary policy rules and
macroeconomic stability: evidence and some theory’, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 115(1), pages 147-180.
Fisher, Chay; and Gai, Prasanna. (2005) ‘Financial stability, monetary stability and
public policy’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Winter, pp.440-451.
Friedman, Milton. (1968) ‘The role of monetary policy’, American Economic
Review, March, vol. 58(1), pp.1-17.
Greenspan, Alan. (2002) ‘Opening remarks’, in Rethinking Stabilization Policy.
Kansas: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp.1-10.
Gruen, David; Plumb, Michael; and Stone, Andrew. (2003) ‘How should monetary
policy respond to asset-price bubbles?’ in Asset Prices and Monetary Policy (Anthony
Richards and Timothy Robinson, eds.) Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia, pp.260280.
Henry, S.G. Brian; Satchi, Mathan; and Vines, David. (2006) ‘The effect of
discounting on policy choices in inflation targeting regimes’, Economic Journal,
January, vol. 116(508), pp.266-282 .
King, Mervyn A. (1997) ‘The inflation target five years on’, Bank of England
Quarterly Bulletin, November, pp.434-442.
King, Mervyn A. (2005) ‘Monetary policy: practice ahead of theory’, Bank of
England Quarterly Bulletin, Summer, pp.226-235.
Kydland, Finn E.; and Prescott Edward C. (1977) ‘Rules rather than discretion: The
inconsistency of optimal plans’, Journal of Political Economy, June, vol. 85(3),
pp.473-492.
Layard, P. Richard G.; Nickell, Stephen; and Jackman, Richard. (1991)
Unemployment: Macroeconomic Performance and the Labour Market. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Lubik, Thomas; and Schorfheide, Frank. (2004), ‘Testing for indeterminacy: an
application to US monetary policy’, American Economic Review, vol. 94(1), pp.190217.
Lucas, Robert E, Jr. (1973) ‘Some international evidence on output-inflation
tradeoffs,’ American Economic Review, June, vol. 63(3), pages 326-334.
Meade, James E. (1951) The Theory of International Economic Policy: The Balance
of Payments. London and New York: Oxford University Press.

28

Meade, James E. (1955) The Theory of International Economic Policy: Trade and
Welfare. London and New York: Oxford University Press.
Meade, James E. (1978) ‘The meaning of Internal Balance’, Economic Journal., vol.
88(351), pp.423-435.
Meade, James E. (1982) Stagflation: Wage Fixing. London: Allen & Unwin.
Meade, James E; Vines, David; and Maciejowski Jan. (1983) Stagflation: Demand
Management. London: Allen & Unwin.
Meade, James E. (1986) Alternative Systems of Business Organisation and Workers’
Remuneration. London: Allen & Unwin.
Meade, James E; Weale Martin; Blake Andrew; Christodoulakis Nicos; and Vines
David. (1989) Macroeconomic Policy: Inflation, Wealth and the Exchange Rate
London: Unwin & Hyman.
OECD (1994) OECD Jobs Study. Paris.
Phelps, Edmund S. (1967) ‘Phillips curves, expectations of inflation and optimal
unemployment over time’, Economica, August, vol. 34(135), pp.254-281.
Rogoff, Kenneth. (1985) ‘The optimal degree of commitment to an intermediate
monetary target’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, November, vol. 100, pp.11691189.
Sims, Christopher; and Zha, T. (2006), ‘Were there regime switches in US monetary
policy?’, American Economic Review, vol. 96(1), pages 54-81.
Stock, James; and Watson, Mark. (2003) ‘Has the business cycle changed? Evidence
and explanations’, in Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing
Economy. Kansas: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp.131-212.
Svensson, Lars E.O. (2003a), ‘What is wrong with Taylor rules? Using judgment in
monetary policy through targeting rules’, Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 41,
pp.426-477.
Svensson, Lars E.O. (2003b) ‘The inflation forecast and the loss function,’ in, Central
Banking, Monetary Theory and Practice: Essays in Honour of Charles Goodhart,
(Paul Mizen, ed.), vol. 1, Edward Elgar, pp.135-152.
Svensson, L and M Woodford (2005), ‘Implementing optimal policy through
inflation-forecast targeting’, in The Inflation-Targeting Debate (Ben S. Bernanke and
Michael Woodford, eds.) Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp.19-83.
Woodford, Michael. (2003) Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary
Policy, Princeton University Press.

29

Chart 1: Volatility of UK inflation
Percentage points
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1956 1961 1966 1971 1976 1981 1986 1991 1996

Source: ONS.
(a) Rolling eight-year standard deviations of fourquarter RPIX (RPI before 1976) inflation. Standard
deviations are leading, ie 1997 Q1 observation shows
standard deviation from 1997 onwards (for eight years).

Chart 2: UK inflation and unemployment(a)
Inflation (%)
30
1971-1992
25
20
15
10
5
1993 - present
0

0
5
10
Unemployment rate (%)

15

Source: ONS.
(a) LFS unemployment rate and four-quarter RPIX (RPI
before 1976) inflation.

30

Chart 3: Volatility of UK GDP growth
Percentage points
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
1956 1961 1966 1971 1976 1981 1986 1991 1996

Source: ONS.
(a) Rolling eight-year standard deviations of fourquarter GDP growth. Standard deviations are leading,
ie 1997 Q1 observation shows standard deviation from
1997 onwards (for eight years).

Chart 4: Output and inflation volatility in the G5
UK: K

US: S

Japan: J

Germany: G

Standard deviation
of inflation
6
5

K
J

1970-92

4

France: F

F

3

S

2

1993-2007

1

G

SG J
F

K

0
0

1

2

3

Standard deviation of output growth

31

