The Role of Regulation in Global Financial Markets
Speech given by
Alastair Clark, Executive Director, Bank of England

At City University Business School
13 July 2000

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2

Introduction

1

These remarks concern regulation in a broad sense. Specifically, I want to say a few words

about a major current initiative in this area, promoted by the G7, the Financial Stability Forum, the IMF
and others. It involves the formulation and implementation of a range of codes and standards relevant
to the safe functioning of individual countries’economic and financial systems and the stability of the
international financial system as a whole. Some of these codes and standards – for example the Basel
capital regime - are already familiar. Others – for example those dealing with the transparency of fiscal
policy or with corporate governance – may be less so.

2

Codes and standards, in one form or another, have of course shaped the environment for

international economic and financial relations for a long time. In some cases they have been enshrined
in treaties or other formal legal agreements. But in many cases they have not - and whether and if so
how they have been implemented has then been largely at the discretion of individual countries. For a
number of reasons, however, the collective interest in a country’s compliance with internationallyrecognised codes and standards has increased greatly in recent years.

3

I will organise my comments under the headings of “Why?”, “What?” and “How?”. Why is this

codes and standards initiative being pursued, and why is it being pursued now? What codes and
standards are we talking about and which of them are most important, given the very different situations
of different countries? And how in practice is it proposed that they should be implemented?

Why?

4

A number of factors have contributed to the current focus on codes and standards.

5

First, globalisation. National economies are increasingly interlinked, so that problems in one

can have rapid and significant knock-on effects in others. Put in a slightly different way, as countries

3

seek to integrate themselves more closely into the global economy, the externalities associated with
their conduct of national economic and financial policies increase. Other members of the “club” may
understandably look for reassurance that everyone is playing by broadly the same rules or at least is not
exposing the club as a whole to unreasonable risks.

6

Second, the implications of greatly expanded international capital flows. Over the past 15

years, according to the Bank for International Settlements, the outstanding stock of cross-border bank
lending has risen from under $1trn to $6 ½ trn, ie by a factor of about 7. There has probably been even
faster growth in other kinds of cross-border financial claims. This compares with an increase in
nominal world GDP by a factor of about 2 ½ and in nominal world trade by a factor of about 3. The
size of current financial exposures means that the transmission of shocks is likely to be quicker, and
quite likely more damaging, than would arise purely from trade effects.

7

Third, an increased emphasis on private markets. The value of capital flows to emerging

markets has risen sharply; but there has in addition been a decisive shift in the source of these flows
from the public to the private sector. This has highlighted the importance of factors contributing to the
efficient functioning of private markets, including especially the availability of accurate and timely
information.

8

Fourth, recent experience. The concern about knock-on effects is not simply theoretical – over

the past twenty years there have been several examples of problems affecting sizeable economies which
have threatened wider systemic damage.

From Mexico in 1982 through the other Latin American debt

crises of the 1980s, to Mexico again in 1994 and 1995, and then the East Asian debt problems of 1997
and 1998, to Russia in 1998 and Brazil in 1999 – all have called for intervention by the international
financial institutions and/or by national authorities in order to contain the potential contagion.

4

9

No-one believes that formulating codes and standards, and monitoring and promoting

compliance with them, is a complete response to these problems. There were clearly many contributory
factors. But in most of the countries concerned there were areas where policy fell short of recognised
good practice, or where features of the financial infrastructure - for example the regulatory regime - left
the financial system excessively vulnerable or where there was simply not enough reliable information
available for lenders and borrowers to make a proper assessment of risk. The position certainly differed
from country to country. But there was sufficient commonality of experience to allow some general
lessons to be drawn – and the current work on codes and standards is partly aimed at capturing those
lessons. What it amounts to is a broad effort to raise the quality and the transparency of public policy
in the economic and financial area in all countries, including the G7. The UK and Canada amongst
others have already set an example.

What?

10

In referring to codes and standards in the present context it is worth emphasising that – as has

typically been the case in the past - we are not talking about legally enforceable rules. One very good
reason is that little international legal machinery would be available to enforce such rules. But even if
the machinery were available, a legalistic approach might not be desirable for all sorts of reasons. This
of course leaves open the question of what happens when a country fails to meet a relevant standard – to
which I will return in a moment. (It is worth noting, however, that in the special context of the EU,
there are now many examples of trans-national legally-enforceable codes and standards, including many
relating to economic and financial issues.)

11

Codes have been drawn up and standards established by all sorts of bodies. I am not going to

enumerate those currently recognised in the so-called Compendium maintained by the Financial
Stability Forum. Depending on exactly what you count, there are around 55 going on 65 in total. They
can be classified in a number of different ways. In terms of subject, there are three main areas:

5

macroeconomic fundamentals; institutional and market infrastructure; and financial regulation and
supervision. A list is shown in Table 1. But the list can also be divided up in other ways: between
standards which are sectoral in scope (eg standards relating to banking supervision) and those which are
functional (eg standards relating to corporate governance or accounting); between those which set
benchmarks for the substance of policy and those which focus on the transparency of policy (ie the
public availability of information about policy objectives, operational techniques, etc); between
standards which take the form of broad principles (eg the Basel Committee’s Core Principles for
Effective Banking Supervision), those which spell out in more detail the intended practical application of
the principles (eg the Basel Committee’s Sound Practices for Loan Accounting) and those which set out
detailed methodologies (eg the IMF’s Special Data Dissemination Standard); and finally between those
which have received formal international endorsement and those which have not.

12

I rehearse all this not because I intend to go further into the specifics but simply to illustrate the

diversity of the approaches reflected under the general heading of codes and standards.

6

How?

13

The length of the list also indicates that it would be a tall order indeed to try to make progress on

implementation uniformly across the whole range of codes and standards. There is an obvious need for
prioritisation. But prioritisation is not straightforward because different standards have different
priorities for different countries, and moreover these priorities are likely to change over time. In some
cases there is also a sequencing implicit in the standards themselves – it would for example be foolish to
put a lot of effort into the more esoteric aspects of prudential banking supervision in the absence of a
proper accounting framework for the measurement of asset values, capital and so on. This issue has not
been, and perhaps cannot be, completely resolved. But it has nevertheless been possible to reach broad
agreement on a smaller group, of twelve, “key” standards (Table 2) - which are key in the sense that the
aim of meeting them would make sense for many, even if not all, countries.

14

The second point to make under the heading of “How?” is that, without someone to orchestrate

and monitor the process of implementation, there is a risk that momentum will be lost. Even if everyone
accepted in principle that all the codes and standards were sensible – and at present that would be an
optimistic assumption – the difficulties involved mean that implementation could well run into the
sands. Who should this orchestrator be? No institution has an operational remit which runs across all
the areas covered by the various codes and standards. But the IMF probably comes closest – pace those
who would curb its role – and we believe that the IMF is the appropriate body to take on the task. But
just to be clear, “the task” is to monitor and coordinate, not to be responsible for each of the individual
parts.

As the IMF aptly describe it, they would maintain the “loose leaf binder” into which reviews

and assessments of progress, produced in some cases by the IMF but in many cases by others, could be
slotted. The so-called ROSC process – the Reviews of Standards and Codes - and the work on Financial
Sector Assessment Programmes, are elements of this approach.

7

15

A third important but contentious aspect of implementation is the question of incentives. Why

should a country commit to observe the codes and standards?

The general incentive, if the codes and

standards are well formulated, should be that compliance will improve national economic performance.
But there is an issue whether, beyond that, there are specific incentives which the private sector or the
public sector might provide. I am not going to enter into the detail of the arguments here, but one
approach is to look at the question from the point of view of the identification, measurement and
management of risk. It would be quite reasonable for private lenders and investors to take into account
compliance with relevant codes and standards if they thought it affected the credit risks they were
running. For the same reason, public sector lenders could be expected to take these considerations into
account. But the public sector also needs to have in mind “systemic” externalities

ie that the failure

of a country to meet its obligations may threaten the financial system generally and require their
intervention to contain the consequential systemic damage. To that extent, the public sector may put
more weight than the private sector on compliance with codes and standards as providing some
protection against this risk.

16

A final, and again important, consideration under the heading of “How?” is that of technical

assistance and training. Whatever the incentives, there are bound to be limits for many countries on
their technical capacity to implement codes and standards; and there may also be constraints on the
capacity of the IFIs and /or standard setters to monitor implementation. In turning the codes and
standards programme into reality, it will be necessary to address these resource issues – which in
practice probably means that regulators and the public authorities generally in the more developed
economies will have to be prepared to commit staff and other resources in support of the
implementation process.

Concluding comments

17

I hope these comments give a flavour of some of the issues which have arisen in the current

discussions on the formulation and implementation of codes and standards. Overall, the setting out of
these standards, and transparency about their implementation, could make a significant contribution to
strengthening the international financial system.

8

18

Let me conclude with three further points.

19

First, better information from borrowers is only half the story. The counterpart is the need for

lenders and investors to make proper use of that information. The evidence on the extent to which they
do this is patchy but it certainly cannot be taken for granted that all lenders, even all major lenders, give
due weight to the information which is available. I believe there is an important challenge to find
incentives which can be applied to lenders so as to encourage them to pursue improved risk
management practices in this area.

20

Second, effective implementation of the codes and standards programme involves many

different parties. The official interest is reflected in various international committees; but it is
important also that the private sector should be engaged. For that reason, a number of initiatives under
the general heading of “outreach” are underway, aimed at telling private market participants what is
going on, seeking their views on what information and in what form they would find most useful, and
encouraging them to make use of it. The IMF, the G20 and the Financial Stability Forum have been
particularly active in promoting such dialogue.

21

Finally, it is important to have a realistic timetable for carrying through the codes and standards

programme as it has now been set out. It is not something which can be delivered overnight, within a
few months or even within a year or two. It is bound to be a long term exercise. But that does not
mean we should delay making a start or slacken our effort now.

August 2000

9

TABLE 1:

STANDARDS FOR SOUND FINANCIAL SYSTEMS

Macroeconomic fundamentals
l
l
l
l

Code of Good Practices on Transparency in Monetary and
Financial Policies
Code of Good Practices on Fiscal Transparency
Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS)
General Data Dissemination System (GDDS)

Institutional and market infrastructure
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l

Principles of Corporate Governance
Core Principles for Systemically Important Payment Systems
Settlement Risk in Foreign Exchange Transactions
Real Time Gross Settlement Systems
Report of the Committee on Inter-Bank Netting Schemes of the
Central Banks of the Group of Ten Countries (“The Lamfalussy
Report”)
Delivery versus payment in Securities Settlement Systems
OTC Derivatives: settlement procedures and counterparty risk
management
Clearing arrangements for exchange-traded derivatives

Financial regulation and supervision
Banking
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l

Core Principles for effective banking supervision
International convergence of capital measurement and capital
standards
Overview of the Amendment to the Capital Accord to
Incorporated market risks
Amendment to the Capital Accord to incorporated market risks
Supervisory framework for the use of “back-testing” in
Conjunction with the internal models approach to market risk
capital requirements
Principles for the supervision of banks’ foreign
Establishments (The “ Basel Concordat”)
Minimum standards for the supervision of international banking
groups and their cross-border establishments
The supervision of cross-border banking
Enhancing bank transparency
Sound practices for loan accounting and disclosure
Framework for internal control systems in banking organisations

10

Securities
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l

Objectives and principles of securities regulation
IOSCO Resolution: Principles for record keeping, collection of
information, enforcement powers and mutual cooperation to improve
the enforcement of securities and futures laws
Methodologies for determining minimum capital standards for
internationally active securities firms which permit the use of
models under prescribed conditions
Guidance on information sharing
Report on cooperation between market authorities and default
procedures
Principles of Memorandum of Understanding
Operational and financial risk management control mechanisms
for over-the-counter derivatives activities of regulated
securities firms
Risk management and control guidance for securities firms and
their supervisors
Client asset protection
Securities activity on the internet
Coordination between cash and derivative markets: contract
design of derivative products on stock indices and measures
to minimise market disruption
The application of the Tokyo Communique to exchange-traded
financial derivatives contracts
Principles for the supervision of operators of
Collective Investment Schemes
Report on investment management principles for the
Regulation of Collective Investment Schemes and
Explanatory memorandum

Insurance
l
l
l

Insurance supervisory principles (“Core Principles”)
Principles applicable to the supervision of international
insurers and insurance groups and their cross-border business
operations (“Insurance Concordat”)
Supervisory Standard on Derivatives

11

TABLE 2:

KEY STANDARDS1

Issued By
Macroeconomic Fundamentals
Code of Good Practices on Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies
Code of Good Practices in Fiscal Transparency
Special Data Dissemination Standard/General Data Dissemination system2
Institutional and Market Infrastructure

IMF
IMF
IMF

Insolvency 3
Principles of Corporate Governance
International Accounting Standards (IAS)4
International Standards on Auditing (ISA)4
Core Principles for Systemically Important Payment Payment Systems
The Forty Recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force
Financial Regulation and Supervision

World Bank
OECD
IASC5
IFAC5
CPSS
FATF

Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision
Objectives and Principles of Securities Regulation
Insurance Supervisory Principles

BCBS
IOSCO
IAIS

1

2

3

4

5

While the key standards are categorised here by policy area, some of them are
relevant to more than one area.
Economies with access to international capital markets could be encouraged to
subscribe to the more stringent SDDS and all other economies could be
encouraged to adopt the GDDS.
The World Bank is coordinating a broad-based effort, involving relevant
institutions and legal experts, to develop a set of principles and guidelines
on insolvency regimes.
The United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law (UNCIT RAL), which adopted the Model Law on Cross-Border Insolvency
in 1997, will help facilitate implementation.
The IAS and ISA are used in some jurisdictions but are not endorsed by all
jurisdictions. The IAS are currently being reviewed by the BCBS, IAIS and
IOSCO.
The International Accounting Standards Committee (IASC) and International
Federation of Accountants (IFAC) are distinct from other standard-setting
Bodies in that they are private sector bodies.

