The notes in your wallet
Speech given by
Chris Salmon, Executive Director for Banking Services and Chief Cashier, Bank of England

At the Plymouth Chamber of Commerce
7 June 2013

I would like to thank Victoria Cleland, Mona Naqvi, Roy Whymark and Kevin Wills for their
contributions and am grateful for helpful comments from other colleagues.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

I am grateful to you for inviting me to speak this morning.

Plymouth is a fitting location to discuss the changing nature of banknotes. Since 2000, Charles Darwin has
appeared on the ten pound note and it was from Plymouth Sound that a young Darwin set sail on the
HMS Beagle in 1831. The evidence that Darwin collected during his voyage laid the foundation for his
celebrated theory of evolution by natural selection.

Outside the natural world, we now observe “evolution” in everything from culture to technology. It is the
evolution of technology on which I intend to focus today, since it has provided both opportunities and
challenges for the Bank of England, and our international central bank colleagues, in managing the issuance
of banknotes.

The Bank’s key objective in issuing banknotes is to maintain public confidence in the currency. To do this,
we need to meet two goals. First, we need to ensure that the public are able to access our banknotes in the
quantities and denominations they require – no trivial task when there are three billion notes in circulation
with a total value of over £55 billion. Second, we need to ensure that the public has confidence in the
integrity of our banknotes. To achieve this, we need to ensure that our notes are secure - easy to
authenticate and technically difficult to copy. Technological change over the past four decades has
profoundly impacted how we achieve both of these goals.

Cash in the economy

One of the most notable of these impacts for our generation is that technological change has made cash a
more convenient means of payment. You have to be slightly, but not that much, older than me to remember
when access to cash was constrained to bank branch opening times. But from a standing start forty years
ago, around three-quarters of the public’s cash is now acquired via ATMs.1 Over the same period
note-accepting machines have broadened their scope – no longer being relegated to the confines of car
parks and train stations. There are now, for example, more than 30,000 self-service checkouts2 in
supermarkets which accept and dispense cash.

Another obvious development is the emergence of alternative payments mechanisms. From debit cards in
the 1990s to more recent innovations such as contactless cards or (coming soon to the UK) the ability to
make and receive payments using mobile phone numbers, more and more alternatives to payments by cash
have become available.

And these alternative methods have unsurprisingly had an impact on the use of cash as a means of
payment. While cash accounted for 71% of all payments in the UK just a decade ago, this declined to 54%
1
2

Source: Payments Council.
Source: Payments Council.
2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2

last year.3 Because of the migration of higher value payments to plastic cards, the average cash transaction
value has also decreased.4

The Bank does not set a target for the value of notes issued: our aim is simply to satisfy the public’s demand
for notes. And in that sense we are sanguine about the impact of technology upon the use of cash. But
technological change can and does raise new challenges for the Bank as it seeks to fulfil its note issuing
responsibilities.

Cash still circulates through the UK according to a traditional wholesale model which, in simplified form,
involves individuals taking cash out of an ATM and spending it at a shop. The shop then returns the note to
a bank and the bank deposits it to the wholesale system where note sorting machines verify authenticity and
sort for quality (including looking for tears, holes, and tape). In recent years, technological innovation - for
example, high-specification note sorters which process around 30 notes per second - has greatly increased
the efficiency of this system.

One major challenge for the Bank is to understand how innovation is affecting this traditional model, so that
we can anticipate and offset any unintended adverse consequences. To illustrate this let me give two
examples: one where we failed to anticipate an adverse effect and a second where (hopefully) we are
making an early intervention to avoid unintended consequences.

The first example centres on ‘tatty fivers’. One major contributor to the tatty fivers problem was the rapid
growth of ATMs. As they became the dominant channel through which new notes entered circulation, ATMs’
dispense patterns began to materially influence the mix of denominations circulating in the UK. During the
first decade of the 21st century, the vast majority of ATMs dispensed only £10 and £20 notes, helping to lead
to a gradual erosion of £5 availability. And as fivers became more scarce, retailers tended to hold on to them
rather than return them to wholesale cash handlers for quality sorting. On average it took longer before the
average £5 returned to the wholesale system, and notes which would normally have been withdrawn on
quality grounds remained in circulation.

This is a classic example of an unintended consequence. Once we became aware of the issue the Bank
had to react. In 2007, the Governor publically committed the Bank to working with the banks to solve this
problem,5 and in 2010, following a successful pilot with HSBC, the ATM operators agreed a target to boost
their £5 ATM dispense. That target was exceeded last year and nearly ten times as many £5 notes are now
dispensed from ATMs than before the summer of 2010.6 The indications are that as the availability of new
fivers has picked up, they have been held on to for less time, and returned more frequently to the wholesale
cash system. As a consequence, the incidence of tatty fivers has declined.
3

Source: Payments Council.
Source: British Retail Consortium.
Source: Speech by Sir Mervyn King at the Lord Mayor’s banquet at Mansion House, 20 June 2007.
6
Source: News Release – Bank of England announces success in its initiative to increase the availability of quality £5s, 26 April 2012.
4
5

3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

3

The second example centres on the impact of innovation on how our banknotes are checked. Until very
recently virtually all cash circulated through the UK according to the traditional wholesale model mentioned
earlier. Increasingly, however, retailers and ATM operators are considering the merits of using a local
recycling model where they refill their ATMs or self-checkout tills themselves, using the notes that they
received at the till rather than returning those notes to the wholesale system.

The potential benefits of this model, for example a reduction in the cost of transporting cash, have led a
number of key players to move towards local recycling. But local recycling also implies that each note will be
authenticated by the wholesale cash industry less frequently – weakening one of the pillars which supports
the safety of our cash. Over the past two years we have been working in collaboration with Payments
Council and key stakeholders in the cash industry to introduce a Code of Conduct for local recycling.
Following consultation with the industry the Code will be introduced this summer. Our intention is to ensure
that those businesses that self-fill their ATMs or self-service checkouts will authenticate their banknotes to
the same high standards as those employed in the wholesale cash industry.

The second challenge we face is in correctly anticipating trends in the demand for cash in a period of rapid
technological change. Just like any other business, we need to make assumptions about the demand for our
product – banknotes – when investing in the infrastructure that defines our long-term supply capability: the
contracts which underpin banknote production and the storage capacity that we build. And when making
these long-term decisions we need to balance the risk of not having enough new notes to meet the public’s
demand for cash against the desirability of avoiding expenditure that proves not to have been needed.

One of the current puzzles in the cash world is that, despite the emergence of many new competing payment
mechanisms, the underlying demand for cash seems, if anything, to have become more resilient. Having
contracted in the 1970s and 1980s as electronic payments and plastic cards became more widely used, cash
has grown roughly in line with the economy, measured in cash terms, since the early 1990s.

Some of this resilience probably reflects the underlying utility of cash as a means of payment: it is easy to
use, anonymous and does not require any third party intervention (unlike say a debit card which relies on the
ability to get an authentication code). For some groups cash may be particularly attractive: one example is
individuals with low-incomes, for whom cash budgeting can be a helpful tool; another is the elderly for whom
cash’s ease of use can be appealing. From the retailers’ perspective, cash remains cost effective for many
transactions: the British Retail Consortium found that while cash accounted for just under a third of retail
transactions in 2012 (by value), it accounted for just 10% of the payment handling costs incurred by retailers.
These types of factors are likely to persistently support the demand for cash.

Set against that view, there are good arguments to suggest that some current strength in demand for cash
will eventually prove to be temporary. Initially ‘network’ effects can slow the adoption of new payments
methods and create inertia which favours established payments mechanisms, including cash. But in these
4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

4

situations tipping points can emerge when a critical mass of early adopters prompt a rapid migration away
from the old network (cash) to the new ones. In so far as the use of cash is being supported by network
externalities, then the underlying demand for cash has some fragility.

A further complication in assessing how the demand for cash will emerge comes from a different, and in this
case not technology based, source. It is that the relative decline in the use of cash for payments has been
accompanied by an apparent increase in saving by cash. Over the past decade, while transactional usage
of cash has remained static, per capita cash holdings in the UK have increased markedly from around £500
at end-2002 to almost £900 today.7 This trend is not unique to the UK and has been experienced elsewhere
including in the United States and across much of the euro area. It is possible to identify factors which might
have contributed to this rise, including the financial crisis, lower interest rates, an increase in
self-employment, but its scale nevertheless remains somewhat surprising.

Drawing these considerations together, it is certainly plausible that cash will continue to remain in rude
health, growing in line with the cash value of the economy. But the possibility of an accelerated move away
from cash for transactions cannot be dismissed, and it is difficult to judge whether the factors driving the
pick-up in cash saving will persist. In this context, while I take it as given that cash will remain an important
part of our lives for the foreseeable future, striking the balance to ensure we can meet the public’s demand
for cash over the next ten to twenty years while avoiding unnecessary expenditure is not straightforward.

Ensuring that our banknotes remain secure

Aside from the impact of payment behaviour and the cash distribution system, technology has also had a
profound impact on the physical nature of cash itself.

The Bank of England issued its first banknote in 1694. The first counterfeit was passed in 1694 too. And so
it has gone ever since. Since 1694 the Bank has faced the same basic challenge: how to design a
banknote which can be manufactured in large scale at relatively low cost (just a few pence per note), and is
easy to authenticate but hard to counterfeit. For most of the time since 1694 we have succeeded in meeting
that challenge, but it is not easy to do. Technology acts as our friend and foe: friend because it allows us to
introduce new difficult to imitate features and foe because eventually progress gives counterfeiters the tools
to copy them.

The current basic template for our banknotes dates back to 1970 when William Shakespeare became the
first historic character to appear on Bank of England money. The Shakespeare twenty was significantly more
sophisticated than its predecessor. Its integrity was protected by the quality of the paper it was printed on, its

7

This calculation does not allow for notes held overseas or that are held by banks or other businesses. Nevertheless, the available
evidence clearly suggests that average individual cash holdings have increased over the past decade.
5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

5

raised print, a watermark, an embedded thread, and the complexity of the multi-colour design. By the
standards of its time the Shakespeare was very secure.

As the technology available to us all to capture and print images has advanced since 1970, the security of
our banknotes has evolved considerably. For example, our most recent note, the Boulton and Watt fifty
pound note, augments the traditional features used on the Shakespeare note with a number of much more
modern components. These includes a wide windowed thread which contains images of a pound sign and
the number fifty which move and switch as the note is tilted, and other images which are only visible using
UV light.

The journey from the Shakespeare £20 to the Boulton and Watt £50 has been something of a technology
arms race between us and the counterfeiters. The UK’s experience mirrors that of many other countries, and
one notable consequence has been that the banknote market place has evolved markedly. Central banks
have needed to employ increasingly innovative methods to protect their notes; often borrowing technologies
from other industries. To give one prominent example, holograms were imported from credit and debit cards.
Unheard of a quarter of a century ago, holograms are now common place on banknotes.

Another development in the banknote market has been the emergence of alternative materials on which to
print banknotes. Australia was the pioneer, first introducing polymer or plastic banknotes in 1988.8 Since
then a number of countries have copied Australia’s example. In most cases countries have switched to
polymer on cost grounds – it lasts longer than paper and wears better – but in recent years some central
banks have also been motivated by the view that polymer may offer some security benefits.

The trend to more sophisticated features is set to continue. Over the next few years we are likely to see
more novel security features which will use state-of-the-art technology to deliver distinct image movement
and novel colour changes to enable cash users to check genuine notes with improved speed and ease. And
we are likely to see greater diversity in the materials on which banknotes are produced. Morocco has
recently issued a banknote printed on a substrate comprising a sandwich of polymer between two paper
layers and Swaziland has issued notes of a sandwich of paper between two polymer layers. Another trend is
to incorporate see-through windows on banknotes. Complex windows can be easily achieved on polymer
and simple windows are now being promoted with paper-based substrates.

8

The Reserve Bank of Australia issued a commemorative AUD 10 note in January 1988 to mark Australia’s bicentenary. Between 1992
and 1996, the RBA issues a new series of banknotes, all printed on polymer. Source: http://banknotes.rba.gov.au/historybanknotes.html
6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

6

In this changing world, the Bank’s job is to make sure that it stays fully on top of all of the latest technological
developments so that it can make the correct choices for our future banknotes. We need to assess which
features best combine the ability to be authenticated when genuine and hard to copy with today’s and
tomorrow’s technology. To enable us to do that we have a dedicated research team which casts its net wide
in considering all available options for our banknotes.

The Governor announced in April that Sir Winston Churchill will appear on the next banknote, and we shared
with the public the image of Churchill which will appear on the note.9 Given what I have said it should be no
surprise that even before we had decided on Churchill, our research team had initiated a multi-year research
programme to identify the technical design which will enable us to issue the most secure Churchill note
possible. Once we have made our final technical decisions we will start the process of manufacturing the
new-style note, with the aspiration of issuing it in 2016.

Going back to 1694 for a moment, the Bank’s first counterfeiting scare was solved by the arrest of the
perpetrator. And it remains the case that we can only succeed in keeping counterfeiting rates low by
combining good design with effective law enforcement - for which we are always grateful - to deter
counterfeiters and education to ensure that the public can identify genuine banknotes and spot counterfeits.

Despite technology increasing the tools available to counterfeiters, we continue to succeed in keeping
counterfeit rates low. Last year, over 700,000 counterfeits were removed from circulation. I wish the number
were lower - zero to be precise - but that level represents a tiny fraction of one percent of the three billion
genuine Bank of England notes in circulation; with the implication that you or I as individuals are very unlikely
ever to come across a counterfeit.

So next time you pull a £10 note from your wallet and you see the image of Charles Darwin, I hope that you
will have more of an appreciation of the evolving life of your banknotes. The march of technology has had a
tremendous impact on banknotes over the past four decades. This has offered many benefits - more choice
to us as individuals about how to make payments, more efficient ways of distributing cash, and the
opportunity for the Bank to issue more sophisticated banknotes. But it also creates challenges for us,
perhaps most importantly the challenge of keeping ahead of the counterfeiters so that we can continue to
safeguard the security of your banknotes. The Bank has met these challenges in the past, and we are
committed to exploiting technological advances to meet these challenges in the future.

Thank you very much for listening.

9

The plan is for the Churchill note to be issued as a £5 note, and that it shall be issued during 2016; but those choices may be reviewed
as plans for issuing the new note are finalised.

7

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

7

References
Bank of England (2012), ‘News Release – Bank of England announces success in its initiative to increase
the availability of quality £5s’, April, available at:
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/news/2012/043.aspx
British Retail Consortium (2013), Cost of Payment Collection Survey 2012, available at:
http://www.brc.org.uk/downloads/brc_cost_of_collection_survey_2012.pdf
Byatt, D (1994), Promises to Pay – The First Three Hundred Years of Bank of England notes, Spink & Son.
Cleland, V (2011), ‘Challenges in note circulation – availability and quality of low denomination notes’,
speech given at the ICCOS EMEA: The Currency Cycle Conference, March, available at:
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2011/speech482.pdf
King, Sir M (2007), ‘Speech at the Lord Mayor’s Banquet for Bankers and Merchants of the City of London
at the Mansion House’, June, available at:
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2007/speech313.pdf
Payments Council (2013), UK Cash & Cash Machines: Trends in cash payments, cash machine
deployment and usage, and other forms of cash acquisition.
Salmon, C (2011), ‘Balancing security and aesthetics: the evolution of modern banknote design’, speech
given at the British Numismatic Society, October, available at:
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2011/526.aspx
Salmon, C (2013), ‘Remarks given at the launch of the public consultation for the Code of Conduct for the
Authentication of Machine-Dispensed Banknotes’, February, available at:
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2013/speech637.pdf

8

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

8

