The Role of the Transparency in the Development of Financial
Markets
Speech given by
William A Allen, Deputy Director, Bank of England

18 May 2000

I am extremely grateful to Alison Emblow, Victoria Saporta, Peter Sinclair and Anne Vila for
comments on the subject matter and on earlier versions of this lecture. The faults in it are all mine.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

“Transparency” has become a fashionable concept in the last few years. A steady stream of papers from the IMF, the
OECD, the G7, the G20 and other international bodies recommends the adoption of transparency in one field of public
policy or another, as if it were a miracle drug that could cure all economic illnesses.
Those who are not directly involved in the discussion may be forgiven for wondering exactly what all the fuss is about,
and perhaps for wondering more particularly whether the people who are promoting transparency, apparently as a
universal remedy, have ulterior motives which they have not disclosed.
My function today is to talk about the role of transparency in the development of financial markets. I hope to explain that
transparency is a necessary condition if active financial markets are to develop, and that there are understandable
reasons why this should be so. In fact, despite what may appear to be the case, transparency is by no means a new
concept in financial markets – by contrast, it has a long history – and where financial markets have developed,
transparency has played a very important role.
In his well-known book “Trust: the Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity”, the sociologist Francis Fukuyama
distinguishes between low-trust and high-trust societies. In low-trust societies, there is a lack of what he calls “social
capital” – the sense of community that leads people to trust each other enough to co-operate with each other in
productive enterprises. The sense of community extends to family members but not generally beyond. Low-trust
societies thus have large numbers of family businesses: they tend not to have large corporations. Unless low-trust
societies find a way of overcoming their lack of social capital, their economic development is inhibited by their inability to
build businesses beyond family size.
Financial markets are potentially one means through which small businesses can get bigger: that is the role that they
have played historically, for example over long periods in Europe and in the United States.
In order to illuminate the importance of transparency, I shall review the various conditions that have to be met if financial
markets are to develop successfully, and to discuss the role which transparency plays in each of them. These conditions
are all about confidence. Investing in securities is a demonstration of confidence in the future – that the investment will
return to the investor all that he or she expects. Without that confidence, the investment will not happen.
Precisely what kind of confidence is needed? I can identify four aspects of the financial infrastructure in which confidence
is crucial for the development of markets:
(i) Confidence in the issuers of securities, whether they be corporate or government issuers.
(ii) Confidence in the currency, particularly in the case of bonds, which offer a return fixed in money values.
(iii) Confidence in the market structure – in the integrity of the intermediaries’ procedures and in market liquidity.
(iv) Confidence in the legal infrastructure.
Confidence in the issuers of securities is extremely important; and it is not easy to secure. This applies both to
corporations and to government issuers. History is full of examples of corporate enterprises which have raised large
amounts of money through issuing securities to investors, and have proved in the end to be worthless. One early
example is the speculative mania in London in 1719 and 1720, when some 190 new joint stock companies were
proposed. They expected to raise some £220 million from the investing public, which was convinced that the application
of the joint stock form of company to all areas of the economy would bring untold riches to their shareholders. Most of
1
them came to nothing .
A much more recent example is the Canadian company Bre-X Minerals Ltd, which was involved in gold exploration in
Indonesia and claimed in 1996 to have discovered a gold deposit there of more than 30 million ounces (worth $8¼ billion
at today’s prices). Shortly afterwards, its shares were listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange. During February and March
1997, doubts begin to emerge about the discovery, and in May that year, an independent consultant reported that the
2
discovery was falsified “on a scale without precedent in mining history” .
It is not surprising that investors require reassurance about the corporate enterprises to which they commit their money.
The Bre-X case shows that even now, institutions have not been developed which can guarantee investors against
serious loss. Nevertheless investors have increasingly demanded that corporations disclose information about
themselves, so that analysts can make a well-informed evaluation of their securities. The information they require
includes financial information compiled and audited according to internationally-reorganised accounting standards. It also
includes non-financial information, such as information about the range of activities in which the corporation is engaged,
and the identity of major shareholders and of the directors. Corporations increasingly have come to realise that such
2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2

disclosure is in their own interests, as it is a necessary condition for access to the funds available from capital markets.
Of course funds are available from banks as well as from capital markets, but banks are likely to demand just the same
information as the capital markets.
To return to the title of this presentation, this is transparency. There is nothing new about it, and corporations regard the
disclosure of information that it involves as being in their own interests.
Of course, there are limits to transparency. Imagine a company whose prospects depend on a unique product which it
has developed itself. Such a company cannot reasonably be expected to disclose to the public, including all its
competitors, complete information about the product. To quote an example, the Coca Cola company has not been
obliged by US securities laws to disclose its famous formula to the public. There is a potential conflict between the
desirability of disclosing information to investors and creditors and the undesirability of disclosing commercially-sensitive
information to competitors, but it is a conflict which it has generally been found possible to resolve in satisfactory ways.
One of these ways is patents on process and product, which offer transparent information to all interested parties, while
preserving and entrenching temporary monopoly rights.
Governments, as well as corporate bodies, issue securities in financial markets; and there has recently been extensive
discussion of the appropriate disclosure of financial information by governments. When governments issue securities,
they are nearly always bonds. The main uncertainty about bonds which governments issue in their own currency is about
the future value of the currency, and I will discuss that a little later. Where governments issue bonds in foreign
currencies, the main uncertainty is often their ability to service the debt.
It has for a long time been common practice for sovereign bond issues (like corporate bond issues) to be assigned
ratings by commercial rating agencies, based on publicly available information. But investors’ decisions to lend to
sovereign borrowers have been influenced not only by the borrowers’ ability to repay out of their own resources, but also
by an assessment of the likelihood that the IMF or a group of industrial countries would, if necessary, provide emergency
support to prevent a default – as for example happened after the Mexican crisis in 1994/95.
When lending decisions are influenced by largely political considerations in this kind of way, one predictable result is an
excessive flow of lending – as is widely thought to have happened, for example, to Russia in the early part of 1998.
Another predictable result is a reaction by the IMF and the industrial countries against the presumption that they should
provide emergency assistance to prevent sovereign defaults. Thus the politics of the situation has changed, in that a
substantial political constituency has emerged which is opposed to the presumption of sovereign bail-outs.
Because those who oppose the presumption in favour of bail-outs do not wish the flow of capital to sovereign borrowers
to be unnecessarily curtailed, particularly in emerging markets, they are also encouraging sovereign governments to
make available to the public a standard set of economic and financial data on the national economy. This is the origin of
the IMF Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS) – which is one of the most important manifestations of the drive
for greater transparency. As is the case with corporate disclosure, compliance with the SDDS is intended to be a matter
of self-interest, rather than something to be undertaken as a gesture to the IMF or the so-called “international
community”.
As I have already indicated, one reason why transparency on the part of sovereign borrowers has been limited in the
past was that investors assumed that the borrower might well be bailed out to prevent a default. Another reason, in some
cases, was that governments felt that they should not be obliged to disclose to financial markets any more information
than they would disclose to their own citizens. However, that left open the question why they did not disclose more
information to their own citizens – a question about which I shall say more shortly. In practice, the additional disclosures
that governments have made as a result of the SDDS and other transparency initiatives have been not only to financial
institutions but to the world at large, including their own citizens.
I should add that the advance of technology, and above all the invention of the internet, has made communication of
information much easier for both the sender and the recipient. Moreover, it is much easier than in the past to ensure that
information is released simultaneously to all interested parties.
Investors in government securities – bills or bonds – denominated in domestic currency need to have confidence in the
future value of the domestic currency, on which the return on their investment depends. There are many examples in
history of investors in government securities being effectively wiped out by inflation: it happened after the First World War
in Germany and it happened after the Second World War in France, Italy and, less spectacularly, in the United Kingdom.
Investors need confidence that monetary policy will be conducted so as to secure and maintain stable prices.
There are strong grounds for believing that inflation is damaging to economic efficiency and economic growth in the long
run. This is, perhaps, the main lesson of the disastrous experience of many industrial countries, including the United
Kingdom, in the 1970s, when very high rates of inflation were accompanied by slow economic growth and steadily rising
3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

3

unemployment. The core of the problem was the mistaken belief in a permanent trade-off between inflation and output –
that is, the belief that governments could “buy” additional output and employment at the cost of a little additional inflation.
The truth, as is now widely understood, is that attempts to stimulate output and employment in this way have only
temporary effects: the longer-run result is higher inflation and no increase in output or employment – perhaps even a
decrease. Nevertheless, it is prudent to assume that governments will always be tempted to indulge in a little bit of
inflation, so as to generate a temporary short-run stimulus to output and employment, and to reduce the real value of
their domestic-currency debts.
What is needed, therefore, is an institutional arrangement that prevents governments from yielding to the short-run
temptations of inflationary policies in the interests of the long-run prosperity of the economy. Many industrial countries,
including my own, have been struggling with these problems since the 1970s, and with some success, as you can see
from the large reductions in inflation that have been achieved, without, I might add, any loss of output or employment.
In order to secure an institutional structure which “locks in” low inflation, the first requirement is a sufficient political
consensus that price stability is indeed the proper objective of monetary policy. If that consensus is not there, investors,
and the general public, will not believe that the objectives of monetary policy will remain unchanged.
The technical strategies that countries have used in their monetary policies have varied. Some have fixed their exchange
rates against the currencies of other countries, while others have adopted monetary policies directed at domestic
objectives. They have, however, mostly had in common a high degree of transparency, including in many cases the
following features:
(v) A publicly-announced monetary policy objective – for example, a fixed exchange rate or inflation target.
(vi) A central bank with sufficient technical expertise and autonomy from the government to adjust monetary policy
instruments, such as interest rates, in pursuit of its monetary policy objective.
(vii) A requirement that the central bank explains its actions publicly.
In some countries at least, including the United Kingdom, this degree of consensus on the objectives of monetary policy,
and the associated transparency, are new features of monetary policy, and their effects have thus far been entirely
beneficial. In the UK, they have dispelled the suspicions that had previously always been present in financial markets
that the true objectives of monetary policy were not the same as those that had been declared, or that the objectives
might suddenly be changed without any prior warning. Inflationary expectations have thus stabilised at a low level,
consistent with the inflation target, and bond yields have fallen to their lowest level for over 30 years.
The third condition for the development of financial markets that I identified earlier is confidence in the market structure –
the integrity of the intermediaries and procedures, and market liquidity. This, too, is a big subject. Many regulators have
published codes of conduct setting minimum standards of behaviour to be followed by intermediaries when dealing with
investors. This provides reassurance to investors about how they can expect to be treated by the intermediaries, and
provides them with a statement of minimum standards in case they wish to make a complaint against an intermediary.
They also set minimum capital standards for intermediaries. Such measures are in the interests of both the market and
the intermediaries, since they are likely to make people feel more confident about dealing. It is also important that when
there are complaints by investors against intermediaries, they are investigated thoroughly, impartially, and transparently.
Among the most important aspects of securities market procedures are the arrangements for disclosing new information
about issuers. Investors will not feel confident about participating in financial markets if they believe that others are
trading with the benefit of unpublished information. It is essential that new information is disclosed to all investors at the
same time, and that those who have access to the information before it is published (eg company directors and
employees) are not able to deal in the relevant securities until after the information is public. Markets in which there is
widespread abuse of insider information quickly acquire a bad reputation and lose business as a result. A vital part of
transparency is discipline in the release of information.
Market liquidity refers to the willingness of market participants to buy or sell a particular security. It depends above all on
how widespread are the investors with an interest in that particular security, and how willing they are to trade. There is an
on-going debate about whether real-time disclosure of trading activity has a positive or negative effect on liquidity. Such
disclosure could involve either publication of bids and offers before trading takes place (pre-trade transparency), or just
publication of information about trades after they have been completed (post-trade transparency). In neither case need
the names of the parties involved be published. The debate is unresolved. In general, the market makers who make a
living by buying and selling securities, and thus provide liquidity to the market, oppose greater transparency because it
would reduce the value to them of the information inherent in the flow of orders from their customers, so that they would
find it harder to provide liquidity to the market. Others, however, claim that more transparency of this kind would make
investors feel more confident about participating in the market, so that liquidity would increase.
4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

4

The final condition that I identified for the successful development of financial markets is confidence in the legal
infrastructure. This is a very big issue, and I have no time to do more than mention it. It is clear why it matters for
investors in financial markets. They need to feel confident that in the event of a dispute going to court, the law will not be
unreasonably biased against them and that the court will be impartial, and that there are sufficient penalties for
transgression and perjury. In order for them to have that confidence, a high degree of transparency about the law and
about legal processes is needed.
In my remarks, I have tried to persuade you that transparency in the disclosure of information is very often in the interest
of the person or body undertaking the disclosure. Transparency is a kind of general cultural development, rather than
something confined to financial markets, or monetary policy, or finance. Transparency is, however, emphatically not an
objective in itself: it is a means to an end, to be adopted in a pragmatic way. It can perhaps be seen as a device for
helping to overcome the lack of trust which Francis Fukuyama sees as inhibiting development and prosperity in countries
which, to whatever extent, are lacking in what he calls social capital.

5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

5

