The UK economy and the world economy
Speech given by
Ben Broadbent, External Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England

The Institute of Economic Affairs State of the Economy Conference, London
26 February 2014

I am grateful to Alina Barnett, David Barkshire and Lukasz Rachel for assistance in preparing this
speech, and also to other colleagues for helpful comments. The views expressed are my own and do
not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of England or other members of the Monetary Policy
Committee.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

We are often told we live in an era of unprecedented globalisation. But the UK has always been an open
economy. The share of traded goods and services in GDP, at around 30%, is no higher today than it was
150 years ago (Chart 1). Chart 2, taken from Obstfeld and Taylor (2005), is a stylised representation of the
degree of openness in global capital markets. It has a similar U-shaped pattern: the globalisation of the past
1

fifty years has served mostly to recover ground lost during the first half of the last century .
Chart 1: UK no more open than 150 years ago

Chart 2: Not the first era of open capital markets

Source: Hills,Thomas, Dimsdale (2010) for data until 1949 and
ONS for data between 1949 and 2012.

Source: Obstfeld and Taylor (2005), “Introspection”

Despite this long history, it seems to me that the public discourse about our economy tends to focus
disproportionately on domestic considerations, domestic policy in particular.
Chart 3: Domestic demand “explains” most
year-to-year growth in aggregate demand

To a degree this is understandable. In principle, a
floating exchange rate means UK inflation is
ultimately under the control of the domestic monetary
authority, regardless of how other central banks
behave. On the real side, the standard accounting
breakdown shows that, from year to year,
movements in aggregate demand are dominated by
its domestic components (Chart 3 depicts four-year
averages of annual growth in GDP and domestic
demand): changes in net trade are relatively small.
Over the longer run, economies can quite happily
follow different “trend” rates of growth for years.

Source: Hills,Thomas, Dimsdale (2010) for data until 1949 and
ONS for data between 1949 and 2012

There is also a wide variation in levels of (per-capita)
income across countries.

1

Volosovych (2011) constructs a quantitative measure of capital market openness and claims it has more of a “J” than a “U” shape, but
the point remains that it is likely to have fallen prior to the second world war and risen since.
2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2

These are correlated, economists have found, with underlying features of national economies – the integrity
of contracts and property rights, for example, or the extent and quality of education – that, while not policy
choices in the conventional sense, are nonetheless amenable to change. Clearly, therefore, we are far from
powerless to determine our economic fortunes.
However, there’s still a risk that, even after the experience of a financial crisis that was so clearly global in
nature, we under-appreciate the consequences of living in a global economy. This morning I want to make of
couple of points in this regard, one about the short run – the cyclical horizon over which shifts in demand
matter more for output – the other about productivity and our economic performance over the longer run. In
doing so I cannot possibly claim to do any sort of justice to the vast literature in this area – it’s called open
economy macroeconomics – and these points are as much about simple statistics as they are about
economics. But they may still be worth bearing in mind.
Correlated cycles
The first point is that, over the cycle, the contribution of trade to aggregate demand is a poor measure of the
influence of global shocks on the UK economy. This is important because, at least in the simpler approaches
to forecasting, variations in net trade seem to be the only way the rest of the world gets a look in. Short-run
movements in output are assumed to be determined entirely by shifts in aggregate demand; domestic
spending – consumption plus investment plus government spending – is in turn assumed to depend only on
home-grown things (including domestic policy); to the extent it matters at all, the rest of the world influences
domestic output growth purely via its demand for UK exports.
But this can’t be right because, in general, domestic demand here is strongly correlated with that in the rest
of the world: Chart 4 depicts their annual growth rates since 1960. Because our economy is relatively small,
this co-movement can only arise from the influence on our economy of shocks from elsewhere – or, at least,
common to the UK and the rest of the world – not from things that originate at home. Chart 5 plots a rolling
estimate of the same correlation going back to the late 19th century. Note that the opening (or rather the
re-opening) of international trade and capital flows during the second half of the last century saw the degree
of co-movement go up. If the rebirth of globalisation has increased the coherence of national cycles, it’s done
so by affecting all areas of spending, not just export demand.
Why might this be? Clearly, there are such things as global economic shocks. World wars, big political
events, shifts in the supply of oil – these are all things that can affect domestic spending in many countries in
a similar fashion. At least among developed countries, the same goes for bouts of technological progress, a
topic I’ll return to below.

3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

3

Chart 4: UK, world domestic demand correlated

Chart 5: Correlation has risen over time

Source: Hills,Thomas, Dimsdale (2010), and Penn World Tables
7.1

Source: Hills,Thomas, Dimsdale (2010), The Conference Board,
and Penn World Tables 7.1
Note: World domestic demand pre-1960 calculated as world
GDP + UK trade balance, the latter valued at $ PPP prices.

But there’s no evidence the importance of these things has increased over time: if anything, the opposite is
2

true . A more likely explanation of the trend in Chart 5 is the rising degree of openness in global capital
markets identified in Chart 2. As it’s become more integrated, the international financial system has become
better at sharing, and distributing, economic shocks, thereby increasing the degree of co-ordination between
economies, their domestic demand included.
You can see both good and bad in this. The good is that country-specific risks get shared. By selling
development rights to foreign companies, for example, a commodity-rich nation can spread some of the
3

underlying revenue risk to shareholders of those companies . Pharmaceutical firms concentrate research
projects with uncertain outcomes in particular countries, including this one, but raise money from across the
world. The fact that a mortgage provider in California can sell default risk to an investor in London or
Frankfurt is, at least in principle, a good thing. By diversifying country-specific risks in this way, the
international financial system reduces their impact on national economies. As that system expands, you’d
therefore expect precisely the rising degree of cyclical co-ordination evident in Chart 5.
As that last example illustrates, however, the potential bad is that the international financial system doesn’t
just spread risk but creates and amplifies it too. The rapid expansion in the market for US mortgage-backed
securities may have diversified exposure to default but, by increasing the distance between the ultimate
2

Per unit of output, oil consumption in the developed world is less than half what it was fifty years ago. As far as wars are concerned,
the bare number of bilateral conflicts has increased since 1950. But so, by a greater margin, has the number of states. The per-period
probability of war for any single state, and the number of deaths in armed conflicts, have both declined (Hewitt et al. (2012)).
3
If they are also consumers of those commodities, the shareholders would also benefit, as they get to hedge their real income exposure
to volatility in the price of their commodity.
4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

4

borrowers and lenders – informationally as well as geographically – it also seemed to increase the risk of it.
In many instances, the final owner of US mortgage debt was both over-leveraged and ill-informed about the
quality of the underlying asset. As I explained in a speech a couple of years ago, the significant majority of
UK banks’ losses were made on their (very large) overseas balance sheets, not on their domestic lending. In
the case of mortgages, for example, British banks lost £15 on their exposure to non-UK loans for every £1
lost at home.
Even in normal times, you can find plenty of evidence that financial conditions in the UK are susceptible to
global developments. Take Chart 6. It plots the average response of 2-year and 10-year sterling interest
rates to surprises in economic data. As you’d expect, news about UK GDP has a significant effect on interest
rates at the front end of the curve. But similar (one-standard-deviation) surprises in US employment, which
has no direct bearing on UK monetary policy, have almost as big an impact on 2-year rates and a much
bigger impact at the long end of the sterling curve than any indicator of UK economic activity, including our
own employment release. More generally, risk and term premia in equity and bond markets are much more
4

tightly correlated across countries than the “fundamentals” would lead one to expect .
In a well-publicised paper last year, the economist Helene Rey said these swings in risk sentiment had led to
a “global credit cycle” that, for many countries, had little to do with their own economic conditions and was
therefore destabilising. The cycle was instead, she said, driven disproportionately by developments in “the
centre country” (the United States). Whatever their origin, it’s easy to see how such shifts in risk sentiment
5

could induce co-movements in national cycles . Because they add rather than subtract risk, these swings in
risk sentiment would clearly be a less benign source of correlation than the diversification effects discussed
above.

4

Shiller (1979) demonstrated that, at least over the sample period he used, corporate earnings were too stable to justify on their own
the volatility of share prices. Campbell and Shiller (1991) established the same result for the relative variances of long bond yields and
short-term interest rates. In both cases, the “excess volatility” of longer-dated security yields is correlated across countries (Dahlquist
and Hasseltoft (2013)).
5
The reference is Rey (2013). Her specific point was that one of the key drivers of these swings in global financial conditions was US
monetary policy. But this wouldn’t necessary induce a positive cross-country correlation in domestic demand: indeed one could imagine
its doing the opposite. Suppose domestic spending began autonomously to accelerate in the United States and that the Fed began to
tighten monetary policy in response. Given the lags involved this could offset the original demand impulse only imperfectly, so US
growth would remain stronger than it had been for some time. But global financial inter-linkages would, on the Rey view, lead to an
unwarranted tightening in financial conditions in other countries and slower growth in domestic demand outside the US. To produce a
positive correlation, therefore, there would have to be other things to which US monetary policy responded (swings in domestic costs,
for example) and/or other sources of variation in global risk premia.
5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

5

Chart 6: UK rates sensitive to US payrolls release

Chart 7: UK equity prices closely correlated
with Euro Area sovereign spreads

Source: Bloomberg and own calculations; sample 2003-13

Source: Thomson Reuters Datastream, BoE calculations

6

The Rey paper has frequently been cited by emerging-market policymakers worried about the impact that the
slowing rate of asset purchases by the US Fed – so-called “tapering” – has had on their own borrowing
costs. But it’s easy to exaggerate this channel. It’s not as if the US is the only source of risk in the world – in
the past 3-4 years, the problems in continental Europe have surely been more important, both globally and
for UK markets specifically (Chart 7 plots the rolling correlation between daily moves in UK equity yields and
the spread between periphery and core-country sovereign bond yields in the euro area).
The idea that the international financial system has done nothing but add risk – whatever its origin – is also
at odds with the longer-term data. If that were true then, as that system grew, one would presumably have
expected national economies to have become progressively more volatile over time. Yet, even allowing for
the effects of the financial crisis, the variance of UK GDP growth over the past 20 years isn’t much higher
7

than over any other 20-year period in our history; there’s certainly no upward trend in the series (Chart 8) .
In any event, my main intention in this section is not to persuade you that global banks and capital markets
are an unqualified “good” or “bad” thing, simply that they increase the inter-dependence of our economies.
Together with the existence of economic disturbances that are truly global, an integrated financial system
means the impact of world on the UK economy goes far beyond its demand for our exports. I’ll end this
section by presenting a simple estimate of the true “global component” of UK growth. Derived by Bank
economists, the blue swathe in Chart 9 is what you get (more or less) when you project UK growth on a
6

The correlation is between daily changes in sovereign spreads and the FTSE all share index, where the former is difference between
10-year German bond yield and a weighted-average 10-year yield for Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal and Spain.
7
The same is true of the variance of world GDP growth. Focusing on US data Dynan et al. (2006) argue that financial innovation helped
to reduce the volatility of GDP growth in that country. Goldberg (2009) discusses the importance of globalisation of the banking system
specifically for risk-sharing and, as I go on to discuss in the next section, technology transfer. Kalemli-Ozcan et al (2013) present
evidence from a wider range of countries that financial globalisation has increased the synchronisation of national cycles.
6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

6

range of world variables, financial as well as real. There are clearly times when international factors do not
explain what’s happened in the UK. Though it was similar to that in the United States, for example, our own
cycle of the late 1980s and early 1990s was completely out of synch with that in continental Europe. Driven
by German re-unification, domestic demand in what is now the euro area began to accelerate at exactly the
time the UK was entering recession; the aftermath of the re-unification boom, during which European growth
then slowed, coincided with the post-EMU recovery in this country. In general, however, the blue swathe
explains much more of UK growth than simple variations in trade volumes.

Chart 8: Variability of UK GDP growth no
higher than long-run average

Chart 9: Influence of rest of world much more than
movements in trade volumes

Source: Hills,Thomas, Dimsdale (2010) and ONS
Note: 20-year rolling window.

Source: Datastream and Bank of England calculations
Note: Swathe represents a range of central estimates from four variants
of a structural VAR model.8

Openness and relative productivity
This tells us something about the relationship between UK and global growth over the cycle. I now want to
say something about the comparative behaviour of the UK economy over the longer run, at horizons over
which activity depends more on supply, and trends in productivity, than on demand.

8

The estimates of the impact of global shocks (innovations to global demand and world prices, and global financial shocks) are obtained
from four variants of a structural VAR model. The four variants employ different identification and estimation techniques over a sample
period covering 1988Q1-2013Q4. Further analysis of these results and a more detailed description of the modelling approach will be
published in a forthcoming Quarterly Bulletin article by Chowla, Quaglietti and Rachel (2014Q2)
7

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

7

Chart 10: UK productivity re-converged towards
US levels from 1970-95, has diverged since crisis

As you know, UK productivity growth has been
unusually weak since the crisis – what output
growth we’ve had has required a much bigger
increase in employment than anyone expected.
The UK isn’t alone in this respect: to varying
degrees the same is true of many other countries in
Europe. But one thing the slowdown has meant is a
significant widening of the gap between
output-per-worker here and in the most productive
large economy, the United States. Relative to that
in the US, productivity in the UK fell by almost 10%
between 2007 and 2012, the largest shortfall over
any five-year period since the 1940s (Chart 10).

Source: Maddison (2007) and The Conference Board
Note: UK and US GDP are in EKS PPP US$.

That post-war period marked the high point for the gap between the two countries. Right up until the late
1960s, productivity in the UK was only around 60% of US levels. It then started to improve, steadily
re-converging to the technological “frontier”. By the mid-1990s the UK was just over 80% as productive as
the US. The stagnation of the past five years, during which that figure has slipped to 74%, therefore
represents a significant retreat.
I don’t want to imply this has happened specifically because of the contraction in international capital flows
9

since the crisis nor, more generally, should one overdo the importance of openness for domestic
productivity. But it is striking that the shape of the line in Chart 10 has the same U-shape as the measures of
globalisation I showed you at the start. The long decline in the UK’s relative economic performance
happened to coincide with the contraction in international trade and capital flows during the first half of the
twentieth century. As these markets re-opened, the gap began to close again.
Can this just be co-incidence? There are certainly reasons for believing it might be more than that. There is
other evidence, across a much wider range of countries, and controlling for other influences on growth, that
10

greater openness allows faster convergence towards the productivity frontier . There are also plausible
reasons why this might be the case. Open capital markets allow countries to tap sources of finance other
than their own saving. So to the extent productivity is low because an economy is under-capitalised, open
markets should help. It’s also possible that international investment – direct investment in particular – brings
with it more intangible benefits, including the underlying knowledge and ideas that drive productivity

9

I’ve suggested in other speeches that problems in the domestic financial system have contributed to the weakness of productivity
growth but it’s likely that there’ve been several causes.
10
Baltabaev (2012), Cameron et al. (2005) and Giles and Stroomer (2003)
8

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

8

performance. Several studies have found that multinational firms are more productive than their domestic
counterparts. Others posit that, over time, these embodied skills often spread to purely domestic companies
in the same sector.
The evidence for these wider benefits of FDI investment – “knowledge spillovers” – is more mixed, perhaps
11

because they require certain things of the host country that may or may not be fulfilled . In a well-cited study
in 2007, for example, economists at the LSE found that US multinationals located in this and other European
countries were significantly better at employing IT technology than their domestic counterparts. They also
found that companies taken over by US firms saw significant improvements in this respect. But there was no
evidence of some more general “spillover” to local companies. The study concluded that the full exploitation
of these new technologies might require managerial expertise that, so far, companies in Europe had failed to
develop. That in turn may be why, at a macroeconomic level, many European economies had failed to see
either the same rates of IT investment as the US, or the same IT-driven acceleration in productivity in the
from the early 1990s (Charts 11 and 12).
Chart 11: Euro area productivity growth fell
below US rates long before the crisis

Chart 12: May be related to returns on ICT

Source: Maddison (2007) and The Conference Board

Source: EU Klems and the Federal Reserve Board
Note: “Europe” = EMU4 + Austria, Finland.

That experience serves as a salutary lesson for the UK and, in particular, the view expressed in the latest
MPC minutes that because “the technological frontier was still advancing globally… there was scope for the
United Kingdom to take advantage of that as a source of higher productivity”. The decline in relative
productivity in the euro area began several years before the financial crisis and there is no guarantee that
our own productivity will again begin to converge to US levels, even as the international financial system
11

There is now a very substantial literature on the interaction between FDI and productivity. Das (1987) and Dasgupta (2012) are
contributions to the theory, explaining why the effect should exist in principle. Papers testing for an unconditional spillover from FDI to
the productivity of indigenous firms include Aitken and Harrison (1999), who find no effect, and Liu (2008), who does. Studies allowing
for the possibility that the strength of any spillover depends on local factors include Borensztein (1998) and Alfaro et al (2009). The LSE
study referred to in the text is Bloom et al. (2012).
9

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

9

returns to health. But I suspect that process – and, more generally, our openness to the rest of the world – is
and will remain an important determinant of our long-run economic performance.
Summary and conclusion
Let me try and summarise these points. As we’ve seen, our weather isn’t the only thing we import from
across the Atlantic. During the crisis British banks lost considerable sums on property-related loans in Ireland
and the United States. This contributed significantly to their need to cut back on domestic lending and the
subsequent economic downturn in the UK. Nor is it just the Atlantic from which the economic weather can
come: as Chart 7 showed, the cost of equity in the UK has for some time been tightly correlated with risk
sentiment in the euro area. Thanks to the deep integration of international banks and capital markets,
problems that arise in one part of the world can rapidly arrive on our own shores. That may be why, as the
system has become more integrated over time, economic cycles (including in domestic demand) have
become more co-ordinated.
Chart 13: UK’s net overseas asset position
maintained despite cumulative deficits

Chart 14: Banks’ funding costs also fell in other
parts of Europe in 2012H2

40
30

bps

Initial FLS
announcement

% GDP
Cumulative current account, 1990Net international investment position (NIIP)
NIIP (market value)

450

Draghi's speech

400

20

350

5 Year CDS UK
5 Year CDS EA

10

300

0

250

-10

200

-20

150

-30

100

-40

50

-50

0

1990 1993 1996 1999 2002 2005 2008 2011

2010
Source: ONS and own calculations

2011

2012

2013

2014

Source: Datastream

I believe it would be a big mistake, however, to imagine that the system brings us only problems. For one
thing, that integration allows the UK to diversify its own domestic risks too. Around 40% of UK-quoted
securities are owned by foreign investors, who will have absorbed a similar proportion of losses on those
assets during the crisis. As it happens, the UK’s overseas assets have a relatively high proportion of equity
and FDI and may therefore be slightly riskier than its collective overseas liabilities. But, to that extent, the
average return on those assets is also likely to be higher. That’s probably why, despite cumulative current

10

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

10

account deficits of 40% of GDP over the past 20 years, the UK’s net overseas asset position hasn’t
12

deteriorated (Chart 13 ).
Second, the cyclical influence of the rest of the world can just as easily be positive as negative. Over the last
year or so, for example, I think that receding near-term risk in the euro area has been a significant contributor
to our own economic recovery. I’m not sure that’s the accepted view. Taking our flat trade balance as
evidence that the rest of the world has failed to contribute anything to the recovery, most commentators point
to purely domestic factors – the Funding for Lending Scheme, for example, or the government’s Help to Buy
policy – as the primary cause of the recent acceleration in activity. The first of these was followed by a sharp
retracement in the funding costs of UK banks, during the second half of 2012 (Chart 14). Following that drop,
through the course of 2013, the supply of mortgage credit and housing-related economic activity both
improved sharply.
There’s no doubt there was a link between these things: domestic policy was important in loosening the
supply of domestic credit, and a good thing that has been. But UK policy alone cannot explain why,
coincident with the fall in funding costs for UK banks, you also saw a steep decline in those for banks in
continental Europe. That, surely, had more to do with the ECB’s declaration that it would “do whatever it
takes” to hold the euro together, and the backing that statement received from core-country governments.
Given their exposure to the euro area economies, the resulting improvement in risk sentiment will materially
have benefited UK banks. There’s an important qualifier: had the European authorities not succeeded in
bringing down risk premia in the second half of 2012, the FLS would have been that much more attractive to
UK banks, relative to the costs of funding in the open market, and its impact on our economy that much
larger. In other words, it has served partly as an insurance scheme, whose value is greater in bad times than
in good. My only point about that episode, and about domestic cycles more generally, is that the international
environment matters, and that it matters more than via trade volumes alone.
Finally, to return to the long run, I rather doubt that the UK would have enjoyed as rapid a convergence in
productivity, towards US levels, had it not been for re-opening of international capital markets during the
latter part of the last century. The inter-connectedness of global banking and capital markets probably
contributed to the severity of the financial crisis. Since then, for one reason or another, UK productivity has
stagnated and the earlier process of productivity convergence has gone into reverse. There’s no inevitability
that we recover that lost ground: even when international capital is mobile, productivity can diverge as well
as converge to the frontier. On balance, however, we are surely likely to benefit from our exposure to the
world.

12

The red line in Chart 13 is the official ONS estimate of the UK’s net overseas asset position. The green line, estimated by Bank
economists, attempts a more up-to-date valuation of FDI assets by using market prices of quoted equity.
11

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

11

References
Aitken, B. J., and A. E, Harrison, 1999, “Do Domestic Firms Benefit from Direct Foreign Investment?”,
American Economic Review, 89(3), 605-618.
Alfaro, L., S. Kalemli-Ozcan, and S. Sayek, 2009, “FDI, Productivity and Financial Development”, World
Economy, 32(1), 111-135.
Baltabaev, B., 2012, “FDI and Total Factor Productivity Growth: New Macro Evidence”, Discussion paper
27/13, Department of Economics, Monash University.
Bloom, N. R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen, 2012, "Americans Do IT Better: US Multinationals and the
Productivity Miracle", American Economic Review, 102(1): 167-201.
Borensztein, E., J. De Gregorio, and J. W. Lee, 1998, “How does foreign direct investment affect economic
growth?”, Journal of International Economics, 45(1), 115.
Cameron, G., J. Proudman and S. Redding, 2005, “Technological Convergence, R&D, Trade and
Productivity Growth”, European Economic Review, 49(3), 775-807.
Campbell, J. Y. and R. Shiller, 1991, “Yield Spreads and Interest Rate Movements: A Bird's Eye View”,
Review of Economic Studies, 58(3), 495-514.
Chowla,S., L. Quaglietti and L. Rachel, 2014, “How have world shocks affected the UK? “ Bank of
England, Quarterly Bulletin 2014 Q2, forthcoming.
Dahlquist, M and H. Hasseltoft, 2012, “International Bond Risk Premia”, Journal of International Finance,
90(1), 17-32.
Das, S., 1987, “Externalities and Technology Transfer through Multinational Corporations”, Journal of
International Economics, 22(1/2), 171-182.
Dasgupta, K., 2012, “Learning and Knowledge Diffusion in a Global Economy”, Journal of International
Economics, 87(2), 323-336.
Dynan, K. E., D. W. Elmendorf and D. E. Sichel, 2006, “Can Financial Innovation Help to Explain the
Reduced Volatility of Economic Activity?”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 53(1), 123-150.
Fons-Rosen, C., S. Kalemli-Ozcan, B. E. Sørensen, C. Villegas-Sanchez and V. Volosovych, 2013,
“Quantifying Productivity Gains from Foreign Investment”, NBER Working Paper No. 18920.
Giles, E. A. and C. N. Stroomer, 2003, “Does Trade Openness Affect the Speed of Output Convergence?
Some Empirical Evidence”, Department of Economics, University of Victoria, Working Papers EWP0307.
Goldberg, L., 2009, “Understanding Banking Sector Globalisation”, IMF Staff Papers 56, 171-197.
Hills, S., R. Thomas and N. Dimsdale, 2010, “The UK recession in context - what do three centuries of data
tell us?”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 2010 Q4.
Kalemli-Ozcan, S., E. Papaioannou and J Peydro, 2013, “Financial Regulation, Financial Globalization,
and the Synchronization of Economic Activity”, The Journal of Finance, DOI: 10.1111/jofi.12025.
Liu, Z., 2008, “ Foreign direct investment and technology spillovers: Theory and evidence”, Journal of
Development Economics, 85(1/2), 176-193.

12

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

12

Maddison, A., 2007, “Contours of the World Economy 1-2030 AD”, Oxford University Press.
Obstfeld, M. and A. M. Taylor, 2005, “Global Capital Markets”, Cambridge University Press.
Rey, H., 2013, “Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy Independence”,
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Proceedings - Economic Policy Symposium - Jackson Hole.
Shiller, R. J., 1979, “The Volatility of Long-Term Interest Rates and Expectations Models of the Term
Structure”, Journal of Political Economy, 87(6), 1190-1219.
Volosovych, V., 2011, “Measuring financial market integration over the long run: Is there a U-shape?”,
Journal of International Money and Finance, 30(7), 1535-1561.

13

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

13

