The Structure of Regulation: Lessons from the Crisis of 2007
Comments given by
Paul Tucker, Executive Director and Member of the Monetary Policy Committee of the
Bank of England

At the LSE’s Financial Markets Group Conference
3 March 2008

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

In this paper, I shall briefly discuss five issues: (1) the ‘collective action’ problem,
whereby bankers have an incentive to herd together; (2) the provision of central bank
liquidity insurance; notably the time consistency and stigma concerns; (3) clarifying the
objectives of central bank operations; (4) whether to ‘lean against the wind’ of credit
cycles; (5) the macro-economic backdrop and preconditions for financial-system
stabilisation. If there is a connecting theme, it is that regimes matter, if only for the way
they affect the behaviour of the financial system (and the authorities).

1. The ‘collective action’ problem

In making sense of the turmoil of past months, I do not start from a proposition that
bankers and asset managers are stupid or wicked. Like any of us, they do respond to
incentives, as many commentators have stressed. They can also face a collective action
problem, about which I want to say something.

For some time before the system cracked, a number of market participants commented
that they thought risk was widely underpriced in credit markets. But they did not know
when, or indeed whether, the correction would come; and were leery of ‘stepping off the
bus’ before their competitors, as that would damage their franchise and so crystallise a
form of ‘business risk’. The result was herding. It occurs on the way up, as well as on the
way down.

These are circumstances in which the authorities, internationally, need to find ways of
intervening to help resolve the collective action problem. That is easier to say than to do,
but we need to engage with the challenge.

2. Central bank liquidity insurance: the time-consistency problem and stigmatised
insurance facilities
The time-consistency problem that can bedevil monetary policy is well known2. The
solution has been to underpin the credibility of monetary policy through a combination of
2
Broadly, if the monetary authority thinks it can achieve above ‘trend’ output growth or employment for a while by reducing interest
rates, it may be tempted to let inflation temporarily rise above the rate it has promised to deliver. But people get used to this – or, in
models, anticipate it – so the extra inflation is simply built into their wage and price setting, without any benefit to output or jobs, but
at the cost of a higher steady-state inflation rate.

2

transparent goals and independent, accountable central banks that care greatly about
monetary stability.

Much less is said about what may be an equally serious time-consistency problem in the
sphere of financial stability. I am highlighting it in the hope that it will capture the eye of
academics, policy analysts and other policy makers around the world.

Here is one manifestation of the problem. It concerns central bank liquidity insurance,
but the problem recurs in policies about support operations, supervision that aims to
tolerate the failure of individual firms, etc.

Commercial banks are widely regarded as special because their deposit liabilities are
money. This puts them in a position where they can provide liquidity insurance, via
deposits and committed lines of credit that can both be drawn down on demand. They
make profits out of doing so, as it provides the basis for their running large mismatches
between the maturity of their liabilities and assets (actual and contingent). The
accompanying conversion of liquid savings into illiquid loans to households and
firms benefits society. But it also exposes the banks to big liquidity risks. They guard
against those risks either by buying liquidity insurance from bigger banks or, for the big
banks, by holding liquid assets. Such holdings cover only part of the mismatch; to cover
it completely would reduce their profits and the lending service they provide. So they are
partially insured against their liquidity risk.

In stressed circumstances, market liquidity may dry up and the supposedly liquid assets
held by the banks may prove to be illiquid.

That is where central banks come in. Central banks stand ready to ‘discount’ – or lend
against the collateral of – certain assets in unlimited amounts.

If the central bank specifies in advance a list of high-quality collateral that it will lend
against, the banking system knows that those assets are liquid in all circumstances and
therefore has an incentive to hold them. But if a bank gets into trouble and still faces a
liquidity problem after utilising all of its central bank-eligible assets, the authorities face a
choice between letting it fail or lending against a wider class of assets. Their choice will
3

turn on an assessment of the trade-off between the risk of financial instability today and
financial instability tomorrow: possibly today if the firm’s failure would have nasty
spillovers to other firms and markets; but tomorrow if the firm is salvaged and incentives
for prudent risk management are diluted. If a bank judges that its own failure is very
likely to cause widespread systemic distress, it is likely to believe that the central bank’s
collateral policy will be relaxed and so choose to hold less of the highest quality eligible
assets than otherwise (since they carry a lower yield than other assets). In those
circumstances, the central bank may not be able to stick to its collateral policy (i.e. time
inconsistency).

Many central banks seek to overcome this problem by identifying a wide range of
financial instruments that will be eligible as collateral for borrowing via some (not
necessarily all) of their facilities but subject to charging a rate above the normal market
rate. But during the turmoil of the past nine or so months, around the world banks have
been reluctant to pay such ‘penalty’ rates of interest for fear of signalling, if somehow it
leaks, that they have an idiosyncratic problem even though they may not. This has
become known as the Stigma issue. In consequence, a key piece of central bank
machinery for providing liquidity in stressed conditions more or less atrophied during the
second half of 2007.

This state of affairs is not sustainable, and is prompting a number of central banks to
innovate to address current conditions. Auctions of funds against wider collateral have
been introduced by the Fed and by the Bank of England, and have definitely helped to
underpin the system. But, compared with a facility, those auctions have been available
only periodically rather than every day. Central banks internationally are therefore
actively engaged in debating longer run solutions.

3. Greater clarity is needed about the different objectives of different types of
market operation

Another feature of that debate is the need to provide greater clarity about the varying
objectives of different central bank facilities and their relationship, if any, to monetary
policy. One can distinguish between
- deciding the monetary policy rate;
4

- delivering that rate in the very short-term money markets, by ensuring that the net
supply of reserves (central bank money) is in line with demand;

- operations designed to alleviate financial-system stress without affecting monetary
conditions.

Making all this clear is important in ensuring that market participants and commentators
can understand what a central bank is trying to achieve in its response to stressed
conditions.

For example, during a period of stress, banks’ demand for central bank reserves may rise
as they seek to hold higher precautionary balances to protect against payments shocks.
Central banks can observe symptoms of such increased demand in a rising overnight rate
of interest in the money markets, but will find it hard to quantify the scale of the increased
demand. If the central bank responds by injecting a lot of extra reserves but does not pay
interest (at the policy rate) on reserves balances, the overnight rate may flip from being
too high to being too soft, potentially creating a perception that it is attempting
to loosen monetary policy. A system that pays interest on reserves balances is relatively
immune to this problem. That may be part of the background to the debate in the US
about the Fed moving to paying interest on reserves, bringing it closer to the ECB and the
UK frameworks in that important respect. In the UK, we have also found it helpful to
have a framework that allows the banking system to reveal its demand for reserves by
choosing reserves targets each month rather than have requirements set for them by the
Bank; and that allows the Bank to increase the range within which reserves balances are
remunerated at Bank Rate. The technical design of the system for implementing
monetary policy can, therefore, affect the degree to which the central bank can
accommodate shifts in the demand for its money without risking unintended and
misleading signals about its policy stance.

The distinction between the second and third types of intervention has been relevant more
widely in recent months.

Steps taken by a central bank to widen its counterparties, extend the collateral against
which it lends, or lengthen the maturity of its operations are not strictly monetary (in the
5

sense that I have defined it) unless the net (and I stress, net) provision of reserves is
affected. They are, of course, steps that alter the terms of the central bank’s financing of
the banking system (or the wider financial system). In practice, many of the measures
taken by central banks in recent months have the effect of switching to lending for longer
maturities against wider collateral. One effect has been to leave the banking system with
higher holdings of government bonds, which would otherwise have been deployed in
central bank operations and are, instead, free to be used in private repo markets. No
increase in the provision of central bank money has been entailed. In that sense, these
operations have many of the economic characteristics of medium-term collateral swaps,
increasing the liquidity of bank balance sheets.

The system would, I think, benefit from central banks internationally saying more about
the range of instruments available to them in the event of a crisis, and the terms on which
they may be available and with what objectives. And as I noted earlier, this is now
featuring in the international dialogue underway to learn lessons from the turmoil.

4. Credit cycles and ‘mopping up’

As we entered this crisis, a dominant school of thought was that the monetary authorities
should not ‘lean against the wind’ during periods of rapid credit growth and/or asset price
rises, but should instead rely on ‘mopping up’ after the event by using monetary policy to
cushion the blow to aggregate demand caused by the bursting of a bubble and/or
tightening credit conditions.

I have for some time been uneasy about this doctrine. In the first place, if one eases
monetary policy to address the adverse macro-economic consequences of one
problem/bubble bursting, one needs to take care not to set off the inflation of a bubble in
another part of the system; one ‘imbalance can lead to another’ by virtue of the central
bank’s actions (Tucker, 2006).

But, as has become clear during this latest painful episode, the central bank cannot rely on
being able to devote its interest rate instrument to cushion the effects of a bubble bursting.
Whether it can do so depends on what else is going on that affects the medium-term
outlook for inflation. Lately, the shock to costs from energy and food prices – and also
6

sterling’s depreciation – has created potent upside risks to inflation via inflation
expectations. Monetary policy must be set on a course to balance the two risks to the
medium-term inflation outlook, as the MPC has stressed in recent months.

So I do not think that ‘mopping up’ is a doctrine than can be relied upon.

Nor do I think that monetary policy can be devoted to preventing or pricking asset
price/credit bubbles over and above its dedicated task of delivering nominal stability over
the medium term.

But I do think that the authorities need ways to intervene against risks gathering in the
system. As I discussed earlier, from time to time many market participants may share the
analysis and concerns of the authorities, but find themselves inhibited by competitive
pressures from taking individual actions to protect themselves, and so the system, from
uncertain financial risk. In a similar vein, we have seen very clearly that regimes
designed largely to deliver micro objectives (accounting, prudential regulation, etc.) can
have macro effects.

So, my conclusion is that we need to revive the debate about whether there might be other
macroprudential levers that could be employed by the authorities, domestically or
internationally. It may be that we will conclude that such levers are not available or
reliable. But we do really need to have this debate – in earnest and in detail.

5. The macro backdrop and preconditions for financial-system stabilisation

The macro backdrop to the current problems warrants some thought. The world economy
needs to rebalance. Domestically, the US, UK and some other economies need to
rebalance.

During the run up, the debate about global imbalances and about the “Search for Yield”
was too frequently conducted in parallel universes, the former about macro-economic
conditions, the second about esoterica in the financial system (CDOs, monolines, SIVs,
etc.). Of course, the two were, in fact, intimately connected. The global savings
imbalances drove down long-term risk-free rates. Risk premia were compressed in part
7

by the appetite of the world’s new (largely Asian) net savers for bonds, and in part by
demand for long-duration bonds from defined-benefit pension schemes around the world.
Many asset managers seem to have concluded that their super ex post returns could and
should be maintained into the future, in part via leverage and maturity transformation – a
toxic mix, especially when cast in complex and new forms. Why complex and new? In
part because companies and governments did not need to issue (vanilla) fixed-income
instruments on a scale that would meet demand. So the market synthesised them, filling
the gap via securitisation and derivatives. The resulting phase of Vehicular Finance was,
in some respects, a gigantic carry trade. And, at a macro level, the counterpart to external
deficits was household deficits, facilitated in part by loose lending standards in a world
where ‘anything’ could for a while be distributed via the capital markets.

The international official sector has spent a lot of the past decade debating the risks from
hedge funds, following the failure of the LTCM fund in 1998. While certainly learning
the lessons of the latest episode, we need to take care not to spend the coming decade
debating just SIVs, CDOs and monolines. What we debate should depend on what is
actually going on in the financial system and how it interacts with the macro conjuncture.

Nearer term, what is needed for the system to stabilise? No one knows for sure. But two
obvious candidates are that the US housing market needs to bottom out; and that banks
need to value their books conservatively, and to raise new capital quickly. These points
are not independent. In the US at least, there has already been evidence of a feedback
loop between financial and macro conditions.

Another precondition may be the emergence of ‘bottom fishers’ prepared to purchase
assets they regard as ‘cheap’. Given the view, apparently widely held in the market, that
many asset values incorporate a heavy discount for illiquidity, and may therefore be
priced below the ‘fundamental’ value appropriate for a buy-and-hold investor, it might be
asked why ‘bottom fishers’ have largely remained on the sidelines. The most common
answer we receive to this question is that the prevalence of mark-to-market accounting
has the effect of shortening de facto holding periods for many investors. This, again,
underlines the importance of the design of the financial system in determining its
behaviour and its interaction with the real economy.

8

Reference

Tucker, P.M.W., 2006. Reflections on operating inflation targeting. Bank of England
Quarterly Bulletin, Summer 46 (2).

9

