The New Economy: Myths and Realities
Speech given by
Dr Sushil Wadhwani, Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England and
Visiting Professor at the City University Business School and the London School of
Economics

At the Travers Lecture, London Guildhall University
20 March 2001

I am extremely grateful to Jo Cutler, Nick Davey, Jennifer Greenslade, John Henderson, Nick Oulton
and Kenny Turnbull for their help and advice. Bill Allen, Chris Kelly (HMT), Mervyn King and Prabhat
Vaze (ONS) provided me with helpful comments on an earlier draft. The views expressed in this
lecture are entirely personal and do not necessarily reflect the views of the MPC or the Bank of
England.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

SUMMARY

1 DEFINITION OF A “NEW ECONOMY” (NE)

Some see the NE as synonymous with an acceleration in the diffusion of Information
and Communications Technology (ICT). I prefer to ask whether the economy might,
for a variety of reasons, have changed enough for it to be material for monetary
policy.

2 THE NE AND BUSINESS CYCLES

Some adherents of the NE have, in the past, claimed that the business cycle might
become an anachronism. While this notion is increasingly suspect today, there is
some evidence suggesting that the variance of output fluctuations has fallen
significantly in the US and the UK. However, this might be a temporary
phenomenon. Changes in confidence remain unpredictable, and technology spending
cycles might now have greater amplitude.

3 THE RECENT FORECASTING RECORD

Perhaps the most persuasive reason for believing that our economies are behaving
differently is the fact that, in both the US and the UK, economic forecasters have
tended to simultaneously over-predict the level of unemployment and over-predict
inflation since around 1993. Factors like the exchange rate cannot, by themselves,
explain this sequence and pattern of forecast errors.

4 HAS THE NAIRU FALLEN?

The evidence suggests that the observed forecast errors appear to be consistent with
both, a fall in the non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment (NAIRU), and
various temporary factors (e.g. lower import prices). The NAIRU has plausibly fallen
because of labour market reform and the intensification of product market
competition.

2

5 THE NE AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH

Academic studies are now growingly supportive of the notion that the underlying rate
of productivity growth has, in recent years, increased in the US. These studies also
suggest that ICT investment has played an important role. Indeed, there is some
evidence suggesting that the growth contribution of ICT in the past 25 years outstrips
that of electricity and railroads over comparable periods. In the UK, the contribution
of ICT to productivity growth has risen significantly in recent years, but UK
productivity growth actually decelerated in the 1994-98 period. It is possible that the
reduction in long-term unemployment, the high pound and measurement error have
obscured the benefits from the NE for UK productivity growth.

6 THE PROSPECTS FOR PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH

It is possible that an economic slowdown, a weaker stock market and some past overinvestment might lead to a significant slowing in productivity growth.

Historically, periods of significant technological change have sometimes been
associated with significant volatility of share prices and corporate investment. For
example, the average share price of electrical companies fell by around 93% after the
1882 electrical mania and this did lead to a collapse in investment spending.
However, it did not stop us from reaping the benefits of electricity eventually.
Similarly, survey evidence suggests that UK business continue to expect e-business to
become more important over the next few years.

Interpreting productivity growth statistics through a downturn will require extreme
care as it is possible that the NE might have increased the average growth rate of
productivity while also increasing its cyclical variability. In any case, deriving
accurate estimates of the cyclical contribution to productivity growth is virtually
impossible.

3

7 THE NEW ECONOMY, MEASUREMENT ERROR AND
MONETARY POLICY
It is possible that measurement issues have led forecasters to overestimate inflationary
pressures in the UK economy.

For example, a preliminary set of estimates of the flow of capital services to industry
has, in recent years, grown much faster than a conventional, wealth-based measure of
the capital stock. Preliminary work suggests that this might have implied a lower
level of “capacity utilisation” and, hence, less inflationary pressure in the Bank of
England’s Medium-Term Macroeconometric Model (MTMM).

To take another example, if one makes alternative assumptions about the
classification of software spending and also substituted US-style price indices for
computers and software, then, preliminary, illustrative calculations suggest that
productivity growth might have been underestimated by as much as 0.4 percentage
points per annum over 1994-98. Preliminary work suggests that this alternative data
would have lowered the estimate of the equilibrium rate of unemployment NAIRU in
the MTMM by around 0.5 percentage points in 1999 which, if interpreted
mechanically, would have significantly lowered estimates of inflationary pressure.

The ONS is working closely with the Bank to continue progress in the area of capital
stock measures, and the issue of quality adjustment of computer prices was addressed
in the Quality Review of Short Term Indicators of Output released by the ONS. We
await further developments with keen interest.

4

1 INTRODUCTION

Mr Chairman,
It is a great pleasure to be here today, on the occasion of the annual Travers Lecture.

Developments in Information and Communications Technology (ICT, hereafter) have
generated much excitement in recent years. Even allowing for the enthusiasm that
might be expected from one of the pioneers, I recall being struck by the boldness of
Mr Gates’1 claim in Davos earlier this year that

“The PC is the best thing that Man ever created.”

Being awestruck by the technological advances we have seen also appears to go handin-hand with a belief that the economic benefits are likely to be correspondingly large.
Hence, notwithstanding the significant decline in the share prices of technology
companies over the last year, Mr Chambers, also speaking in Davos2 asserted that

“The productivity gain that will be delivered by IT will be
at least as great as the electricity, transportation and
telephone revolutions put together.”
There has, in recent years, been much discussion of the ‘New Economy’(NE,
hereafter). There is no generally accepted definition of what one means by the NE.3
Recall that the term NE, in the early 1980s, implied an economy that was driven by
services rather than manufacturing.4 Then, the worry was that a service-driven
economy was going to create poor, low-wage jobs. More recently, the use of the term
NE has been transformed radically. Unsurprisingly, there are those who see the NE as
being synonymous with an acceleration in the diffusion of Information and
Communications Technology (see, e.g. Gordon (2000)). However, I regard that as a
rather narrow definition. Recall that John Travers was, of course, active in the free

1

The Chairman of Microsoft, as quoted in The Independent, 29 January 2001.
The President of Cisco, also quoted in The Independent, 29 January 2001.
3
See Browne (2000) for an extensive discussion of this issue.
4
See, eg Mandel (2001).
2

5

trade movement during the mid-19th century. Indeed, much that might be different
about the economy today relates not just to ICT advances, but also to the effects of
globalisation, intensifying product market competition, labour market reform,
financial market liberalisation and several other factors.

A more appropriate characterisation of how a central banker might define the NE is,
perhaps, that provided by Chairman Greenspan.

“… it is certainly true that we have a new economy. It is different.
It is behaving differently and it requires a different type of monetary
policy to maintain its growth than we had in the past.”5
I shall, therefore, discuss today some of the important ways in which our economies
seem to be operating differently as compared to, say, the seventies and eighties.
Although I do not always believe some of the more extravagant claims that are made
for the NE, my best guess is that enough has changed for it to be material to the
setting of monetary policy.

2

IS THE BUSINESS CYCLE DEAD?

In recent years, it had become increasingly fashionable to assert that recessions were a
thing of the past. For example, consider the following quote from the Wall Street
Journal in 1996:

“From boardrooms to living rooms and from government offices
to trading floors, a consensus is emerging. The big, bad business
cycle has been tamed.” (15 November 1996),
or, more recently, a columnist6 in the same journal

“The business cycle – a creation of the Industrial Age – may
well become an anachronism.”

5
6

Testimony before Senate Banking Committee, 23 February 2000.
“So Long, Supply and Demand”, Thomas Petzinger, Jr, 31 December 1999, R3.

6

Of course, since late last year, sentiment has deteriorated significantly, with increased
concern about a recession in the US. While the notion that the business cycle might
be dead might seem even more questionable now, the less extreme view that
economies might have become more stable is clearly worth taking seriously.
Research at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York7 has shown that a significant
decline in the volatility of US GDP growth has occurred since the mid-eighties –
specifically, the variance of output fluctuations over the 1953-83 period is more than
four times as large as the variance for the period since 1984. They show that the
reduction in volatility largely emanates from a reduction in the volatility of durable
goods production and that, further, this appears to correlate with a decline in the share
of durable goods accounted for by inventories. One hypothesis that might explain
their results are that changes in inventory management, such as the use of ‘just-intime’techniques, have helped bring about a reduction in the share of durables
inventory. Of course, ICT advances have facilitated some of the improvements in
inventory management techniques as information now flows more speedily than
before.

Figure 1 shows that a similar reduction in the volatility of output growth has also
occurred in the UK. Table 1 shows, though, that unlike the US, little of the decline in
the volatility of output is accounted for by stocks – instead, the largest arithmetical
source of the decline in the volatility of GDP growth is what has happened to the
volatility of consumption growth.

A variety of possible factors could potentially explain the decline in the volatility of
consumption growth, though one possibility is that financial liberalisation might have
reduced the effect of credit constraint-induced lurches in consumption growth. Given
that the stock-output ratio has fallen in the UK as well, and the wealth of anecdotal
evidence on ‘just-in-time’stocks, it does, at first sight, seem surprising that
stockbuilding has not become less volatile. This merits further research.

7

See McConnell and Quiros (2000).

7

FIGURE 1

Rolling 5-Year Standard Deviations
of Quarterly GDP Growth

60

64

68

72

76

80

84

88

92

2
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
96 2000

TABLE 1
VOLATILITY OF THE COMPONENTS OF GDP GROWTH1
1955-1984

1985-2000

GDP1

1.24

0.58

STOCKS2

0.73

0.69

CONSUMPTION2

0.78

0.47

INVESTMENT2

0.47

0.46

1 Standard deviations of quarterly growth.
2

Standard deviations of the contributions to quarterly GDP growth

Although the decline in observed output volatility is encouraging, it is appropriate to
be cautious. First, one should recall that previous, long-lived economic expansions
have led to the misplaced belief that lower volatility was here to stay, e.g. Browne
(2000) reminds us that, in 1968, the US Commerce Department dropped the title,
“Business Cycle Developments” from one of its publications, concluding that the
business cycle was dead.

8

Second, there are many other causes of recessions which are unaffected by the NE.
For example, the sharpness of the fall of business and consumer confidence in the US
in the last few months has been a surprise. However, Chairman Greenspan8 reminds
us that -

“The unpredictable rending of confidence is one reason that recessions
are so difficult to forecast. … . Our economic models have never been
particularly successful in capturing a process driven in large part by
non-rational behaviour.”
Third, and perhaps most importantly, some of those who believe that we have a NE
also think that the business cycle has not been repealed, but “… been reincarnated in a
different garb … ”.9 Michael Mandel, the economics editor of Business Week, a
magazine that was early to forecast an upturn in productivity growth in the US, has
recently published a book with the title “The Coming Internet Depression”. He
argues that in a downturn, a vicious cycle might develop.

Specifically, if investment sags, productivity growth will slow, which might cause the
stock market to fall. Of course, the fall in the stock market will further reduce
investment and adversely affect the flow of venture capital, which, in turn, will reduce
productivity growth further. Mandel draws specific attention to the fact that,
historically, venture capital funding cycles have a significant amplitude – for
example, between 1987 and 1991, first-round financing for new companies fell by
75%.

We shall return to a discussion of Mandel’s hypothesis when I consider the cyclicality
of productivity growth below, but suffice it to say that there is nothing in the NE
view, properly understood, to suggest that recessions will not occur. Historically,
periods of rapid technological change have not been recession-free.

That is why I have never fully understood authors who have argued that the NE can
contribute to much higher share prices because it can rationalise a very low, or even

8
9

Monetary Policy Report to Congress, 28 February 2001.
See, eg Mandel (2001) page 52.

9

zero, equity risk premium. A representative example is that of a Wall Street equity
strategist, arguing, in May 1998, that the “risk premium is dead”10, because

“There is no threat of world conflict … . . There is no recession in
sight … . American prosperity is structural, not transitory.”
Of course, recent events have reawakened perceptions of risk associated with holding
equities.

Notwithstanding the re-emergence of recession risk and a higher equity risk premium,
it is, nevertheless, true that the US and UK economies appear to have behaved
differently in recent years, and it is to a consideration of this evidence that I turn next.

3

THE RECENT FORECASTING RECORD

Figure 2 compares the forecasts by Blue Chip panellists for unemployment and
inflation in the US as compared to the actual out-turns over the 1993-2000 period.11

FIGURE 2

Inflation

Unemployment
Percent

4.5
Blue Chip Forecasts

4.0

Blue Chip Forecasts

Percent

7.0

3.5

6.5

3.0

6.0
5.5

2.5

5.0

Outturns

2.0

4.5

Outturns

1.5

4.0

1.0
1991

1993

7.5

1995

1997

3.5
1991

1999

10

1993

1995

1997

1999

Byron Wien of Morgan Stanley in a piece, “Risk Premium – R.I.P”, though I should emphasise that
these sentiments were by no means unusual.
11
Kohn (1999) presented a similar picture of the 1991-97 period.

10

Note that forecasters have, for most of the period, over-predicted the level of the
unemployment rate. Nonetheless, they have simultaneously over-predicted inflation
until recently.

Similarly, economic forecasters have been persistently too gloomy about the UK
economy since the departure from the ERM.
Table 2 displays the average forecast errors that have been made over this period.12
Focussing on the average of all forecasts (i.e. ‘the consensus’), notice that, on
average, GDP growth has been underestimated by about 0.5% pa, which is a large
error in relation to the actual average annual growth rate of around 2.9%.

TABLE 2
AVERAGE FORECAST ERRORS1 IN THE UK, 1993-99
AVERAGE3
ERROR

SIGNIFICANT4
AT 10% LEVEL

+0.48%

YES

-0.53%

YES

GDP GROWTH FORECAST
CONSENSUS2

INFLATION (RPIX) FORECAST
CONSENSUS2

1
2
3
4

Four quarter-ahead forecast errors.
Consensus forecast taken from ‘Consensus Economics’.
Sample period: 1993 I – 1999 IV.
Using a t-test over this sample period, with Newey-West standard errors.

12

These numbers are based on preliminary work by Nick Davey and Jennifer Greenslade of the MPC
Unit at the Bank of England, i.e. they are a part of the group of economists who work with the
‘external’members of the MPC.

11

Now, a conventional view holds that if GDP growth were faster than expected over a
sustained period of time, then,13 on average, actual inflation must also be higher than
expected. However, the actual inflation out-turn over this period was, on average,
0.5% lower than the ‘consensus’ inflation forecast. Hence, economic forecasters
appear to have been simultaneously too gloomy about, both, GDP growth and
inflation. I should say, in passing, that virtually all forecasters (including the Bank of
England) failed to spot this benign sequence of events during the 1990s. There are a
variety of possible explanations for this phenomenon. One class of hypotheses would
envisage a significant change in the structural relationships that underlie the
forecasting processes. I discuss some of these hypotheses in the next section, as
policymakers must always be alive to the possibility that historical relationships might
be breaking down.

Before doing so, I note that some argue that the low inflation out-turns are attributable
entirely to a strong exchange rate. I find that implausible as sterling was weak during
the 1992-96 period, and only strengthened significantly thereafter. Hence, the
exchange rate can only potentially explain the surprisingly low inflation out-turns for
a part of the sample period. Further, we are trying to explain the simultaneous
occurrence of higher-than-expected GDP growth and lower-than-expected inflation.
While an unexpectedly high exchange rate can readily explain surprisingly low
inflation out-turns, in most standard macro-models, a stronger-than-expected
exchange rate would cause lower-than-expected GDP growth (not higher-thanexpected). Further, I have argued previously (see Wadhwani (1999)) that a part of the
explanation of the strength of sterling versus the continental European currencies is
the possibility that the UK has embraced the NE more readily than Europe. If true,
then a part of the disinflationary impact of strong sterling can be attributed to the NE.

I now turn to consider some direct evidence for the structural changes that underlie
the NE hypothesis.

13

Conditional on potential output growth having remained constant.

12

4 HAS THE NAIRU FALLEN?

An example of a structural change which might explain the pattern of observed
forecast errors would be a fall in the so-called non-accelerating inflation rate of
unemployment (NAIRU hereafter).

An impressive feature of recent US experience is that, over the period 1992-2000,
although unemployment fell from 7.5% in 1992 to 4.1% in 1999, the rate of price
inflation was essentially constant. Moreover, when the unemployment rate first fell
below 6% (the then prevailing ‘consensus’estimate of the NAIRU), many economists
predicted an acceleration in inflation which failed to materialise. UK experience has
been quite similar. In 1995, the consensus estimate of the NAIRU was that it was
around 6½ - 7% (using the claimant count definition). Yet, unemployment has fallen
steadily to the current 3.4% without, as yet, triggering any discernible rise in inflation.

Of course, various alternative hypotheses have been advanced in an attempt to explain
these facts. In the US, they include:-

a) Temporary factors

It is argued that lower import prices (a higher dollar, the

Asian crisis etc) and decelerating health insurance costs have played an important
role in temporarily depressing inflation, and that the NAIRU is actually higher
than the current unemployment rate.14

A variant of this view argues that the acceleration of productivity growth in the
1990s has not, as yet, been fully reflected into wages because wage aspirations
respond slowly to increases in productivity growth.15 As aspirations catch up,
inflation will rise so the fall in unemployment may only be partially sustainable.

b) Permanent Factors One might expect the fall in unemployment to be sustainable
if the NAIRU has actually fallen for NE-type reasons.

14
15

See, eg Blinder and Yellen (2001).
See, eg Ball and Moffitt (2001)

13

Now, the NAIRU might fall either because of improvements in the workings of
the labour market, or because of the intensification of product market competition.
In terms of the labour market, various hypotheses that have been advanced include
changes in how people look for work (e.g. temporary help agencies), or
differences in the demographic composition of the workforce.16 The increased
openness of the US economy, product market deregulation and, more recently, the
Internet are all possible explanations for the widely-repeated perception of an
intensification of product market competition, which might also have helped
lower the NAIRU.

As one would imagine, various authors have attempted to trace the evolution of
the NAIRU in the US17, but given the well-known difficulties with this kind of
work, obtaining a precise split between the rate of the temporary and permanent
factors is difficult. However, I find it difficult to believe that temporary factors
could entirely explain why inflation has been so benign even as unemployment
has fallen. For instance, one needs a whole sequence of temporary factors for an
eight-year period to explain what has happened. In any case, several studies point
to some role for an enduring decline in the NAIRU.

Turning to the UK, I have previously discussed the far-reaching changes that have
occurred in the labour market over the last two decades (see Wadhwani (2000a)),
so I will not have much to say on that topic today. However, Table 3 reminds us
that, along a variety of dimensions, a great deal is different today (cf. 1998 vs
1980). Union membership and strike activity are much lower. Imbalances in the
pattern of labour demand and supply have diminished significantly. Turning to
the unemployment benefits regime, the conventional replacement ratio (i.e. the
ratio of out-of-work benefit to estimated in-work income) has fallen. Further, the
New Deal, and other measures which have tightened the availability of benefits
have also probably been influential. Also, Barwell (2000) suggests that some of
the decline in unemployment can be attributed to changes in the age structure of
the labour force.

16
17

See, eg Katz and Krueger (1999), for a discussion of some of these hypotheses.
See, eg Staiger, Stock and Watson (2001), and the many references therein.

14

It is notable that if one takes the wage equation that is to be found in the Bank of
England’s core macro-econometric model (see Bank of England (Sept 2000)),
then, there is evidence that it has over-predicted wage growth in recent years (i.e.
since around 1992).

TABLE 3
SOME KEY FEATURES OF THE LABOUR MARKET (1998 VS 1980)
FACTORS

1998

1992

1980

UNION DENSITY

0.30

0.36

0.49

NUMBER OF WORKING DAYS LOST (000s)

30

48

957

(a) INDUSTRIAL*

0.24

1.26

1.18

(b) SKILLS **

4.9

8.0

8.00

REPLACEMENT RATIO

0.18

0.18

0.24

MISMATCH

*Annual (absolute) change in the ratio of employee jobs in the production and
construction industries to total employee jobs.
**Ratio of manufacturing firms reporting skilled labour shortages to those reporting
shortages of other labour (source: CBI Industrial Trends Survey).
It is sometimes pointed that while many of the labour market variables that are
supposed to underlie the NAIRU changed during the 1980-92 period, much of the
evidence for a lower NAIRU appears to post-date 1992. Hence, some argue that the
changes in the labour market cannot be the explanation for the change in the NAIRU.

On the other hand, industrial relations experts like Professor William Brown of
Cambridge argue that the structural improvements in the labour market during the
1980-92 period did not translate into improved wage performance until other catalytic
events induced firms to undertake radical industrial relations change in the early
1990s. Possible candidates as catalysts are the 1990-92 recession, and the re-election
of the government in 1992, which implied that many of the structural changes in the
labour market were not going to be reversed. There is case-study evidence in favour
of both these factors having played some role (see e.g. Brown et al (1999)). Other
possible catalytic events include the reduction in inflation expectations, which began
during the recession in the early 1990s, but was possibly aided by the adoption of an

15

explicit inflation target after 1992. Personally, I have no problem with the notion that
structural changes can take time before they manifest themselves in improved
macroeconomic performance. Any changes to the way labour is used (e.g. reforming
pay systems, improving selection, etc) requires managerial effort, and takes time to
put in place and be effective.

Of course it is plausible that some of the improvement in the wage-unemployment
trade-off during the late 1990s in the UK is also attributable to temporary factors like
lower import prices – caused by a combination of an appreciation of sterling, weak
commodity prices during the 1997-98 Asian crisis and possible supply-side
improvement in other countries. Note though that the trade-off appeared to improve
after the UK left the ERM in 1992 even though a fall in sterling boosted import
prices, so I am relatively confident that structural changes have also played a role.

Of course, many of those who have been excited by the potential economic impact of
ICT, typically think first of the impact on productivity – it is to a discussion of that
issue that I turn next.

5

THE ‘NEW ECONOMY’AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH

As long ago as 1995, various people were arguing (e.g. Business Week) that the NE
had led to an acceleration of productivity growth in the US.
This view was initially resisted by academic economists. 18 Then, the view gradually
evolved as a mixture of data revisions and the passage of time appeared to lead to a
discernible change in the trend rate of measured productivity growth. Even then,
there was some further resistance to accepting the possibility of a change in the rate of
structural productivity growth. The rise in actual productivity growth was initially
characterised as cyclical, then said to be confined only to the ICT-producing area, and
then only to the durables manufacturing sector and so on.19 This is an active research
area, and the debate continues to move ahead.20
18

A representative view was that of Blinder (1997), who characterised it as “mostly poppycock”.
See Gordon (2000) for discussion of some of these issues.
20
See Bosworth and Triplett (2000) for a recent survey.
19

16

We know that non-farm labour productivity growth has increased from 1.5% over
1973-95, to around 2.9% in the 1995-2000 period. Although different studies
disagree on the precise magnitudes, we also know that:-

(a) Boost to capital per head
About one-third to one-half of the acceleration in labour productivity growth has
come through the boom in corporate investment. Much of the capital deepening that
occurred is largely accounted for by more ICT capital per head. At least some of this
extra investment has occurred because the price of ICT capital was falling fast, in
part, because of Moore’s law, according to which the processing power of a silicon
chip would double every 18 months.

(b) Other factors
In terms of the remainder of the increase in productivity, different studies disagree
about the relative importance of –

(i)

More efficient production of ICT equipment itself.

(ii)

The benefits conferred by the use of ICT in non-ICT sectors.

(iii)

The stage of the business cycle, with productivity growth tending to be higher
in booms.

However, some of the more recent studies argue that the productivity rebound was not
merely confined to a few new-economy sectors, but that various other sectors also did
well. 21 Also, Basu et al (2000) attempt to allow for the influence of temporary factors
like factor utilisation on productivity growth, but conclude that “… . the recent
increase in productivity growth does appear to arise from an increase in technological
change”. Notwithstanding this work, it remains extremely difficult to know as to how
much of the increase is productivity growth has been related to the fact that GDP
growth has been high.

21

See, e.g. Nordhaus (2001) or Basu et al (2000).

17

Nevertheless, so far, the academic evidence in the US is growingly supportive of the
notion that ICT investment has played an important role in increasing labour
productivity growth in a variety of sectors of the economy, which is broadly
consistent with predictions made by various NE advocates from around 1995
onwards.

Of course, one must recall that the post-1973 period was one of relatively slow
productivity growth which spawned a large number of studies which attempted to
explain the productivity “slowdown” that occurred from around that date. Hence, the
post-1995 acceleration of growth has occurred in the context of productivity growth
having been weak in the preceding period. The recent spurt in productivity growth in
the 1995-2000 period is by no means historically unprecedented, e.g. non-farm
business productivity grew faster in 1960-65 than in 1995-2000.

On the other hand, the contribution of ICT to productivity growth is, by historical
standards, impressive. The creation of a railway system must have had an important
effect on John Travers’wholesale grocery business. It is therefore significant that
Crafts (2000) argues that “… . the growth contribution of ICT in the past 25 years
outstrips that of electricity and even more so that of railroads over comparable
periods … .”. This is documented in Table 4, which shows that even before the post1995 period, the contribution of ICT to growth compared favourably relative to these
other innovations.

TABLE 4
RELATIVE CONTRIBUTION OF DIFFERENT TECHNOLOGIES TO US GROWTH
(percentage points per year)

ICT

1974-90
0.65

1991-95
0.76

RAILROADS

1839-70
0.21

1839-90
0.35

ELECTRICITY

1894-1929
0.56

1919-29
0.98

1996-99
1.54

Source: Crafts (2000)

18

Turning now to the UK, anecdotal evidence suggests that ICT investment has grown
at a healthy rate in recent years – indeed, Table 5 suggests that, investment in
software and telecoms equipment in the UK has matched or exceeded growth rates in
the US in the last decade.22 While the UK has not matched the stunning 35% growth
rate in computer investment in the US, investment in that area has nevertheless grown
at a healthy clip (28% pa).

TABLE 5
GROWTH RATES OF ICT INPUTS IN THE UK AND US

US

UK

1990-95

1995-99

1989-94

1994-98

SOFTWARE

12.8

13.1

17.8

12.6

COMPUTERS

17.5

35.9

18.6

28.4

TELECOMMUNICATIONS
EQUIPMENT

3.6

7.2

8.7

13.5

Source: Oulton, Bank of England

Table 6 displays the relative contribution of ICT to productivity growth in recent
years. As one might expect, they show the contribution of ICT capital to productivity
growth rising in both countries (from around 0.4% in 1974-90 to around 1% in the
post-1995 period in the US, and from 0.35% in 1979-89 to 0.6% in 1994-98 in the
UK).

The level of the ICT contribution is lower in the UK, in part because the income share
of ICT inputs started at a lower level.23 However, notwithstanding the rising
22

Table 5 is based on the measures of ICT investment discussed in Section 7 below.
Note that these estimates of the ICT contribution to growth in the UK are rather higher than those in
Kneller and Young (2000), in part because those authors excluded the contribution of software and
telecommunications. The calculations reported in Goldman Sachs (2000) also potentially understate
the contribution of ICT because they do not correct for the potential understatement of software
investment.

23

19

contribution from ICT, productivity growth in the UK decelerated in 1994-98 vs the
early 90s, while it accelerated in the US. This is puzzling.

Kneller and Young (2000) argue that a part of the decline in productivity growth may
be attributed to the high pound, which depressed investment in ‘other capital’, whose
(see Table 6) contribution fell markedly over this period. They also argue that the

TABLE 6
PRODUCTIVITY AND THE CONTRIBUTION OF ICT:
A US-UK COMPARISON
US

UK

1974-90

1990-95

1995-99

1979-89

1989-94

1994-98

1.43

1.61

2.67

2.20

2.57

1.58

ICT capital

0.44

0.50

0.96

0.35

0.39

0.62

Other capital

0.37

0.11

0.14

0.52

0.96

0.11

TFP plus labour quality

0.62

1.00

1.57

1.32

1.23

0.85

Growth of
Output per hour
(% pa)
Contributions from
(pp pa)

Source: US: Oliner and Sichel (2000)
UK: Oulton, Bank of England

unemployed who were absorbed into employment over the 1994-98 period were, on
average, less productive on account of having lost skills during their spell of
unemployment. On the basis of these hypotheses, one would argue that the benefits
of ICT might have been obscured during the 1994-98 period, and that as the adverse
effects of a high pound wear off and/or the rate at which the long-term unemployed
enter employment diminishes, productivity growth can be expected to pick up.
Certainly, productivity growth has picked up more recently – the four-quarter growth
rate is currently 24 around 2.5%.

24

2000 Q3

20

Another possibility is that measured productivity growth understates actual
improvements in productivity. There are reasons to believe that this has been an
important factor in the US (see, e.g. Corrrado and Slifman (1999)), where it is likely
that productivity growth has been increasingly understated in recent years. Now,
work on possible biases in the measurement of ICT in the UK suggests that GDP and
labour productivity growth may have been understated by perhaps around 0.4 pp pa
during 1994-9825 (that is already allowed for in the estimates in Table 6).

Of course, there may be other reasons for believing that productivity growth has been
understated during the late 1990s. I have previously discussed this issue at some
length (see Wadhwani (2000b)), so I shall be brief here, but I would point to –

(i)

Official data suggest that manufacturing productivity growth was zero during
1995-97, while survey responses from the CBI Pay Databank sample
suggested productivity growth averaged around 4% pa over this period.

(ii)

No-one has satisfactorily explained why the measured deceleration in
manufacturing productivity growth appeared to coincide with a rise in
profitability (over the 1995-97 period).

(iii)

The “hard-to-measure” service sectors have become more important over time.

Of course, more research is needed, but it is possible that measurement issues have
obscured some of the benefits from the NE on UK productivity.

6 THE PROSPECTS FOR PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH

Notwithstanding evidence that ICT technology has made a significant contribution to
productivity growth, there has, of course, been a significant change in sentiment
recently. For example, the Financial Times recently proclaimed:

25

I discuss this work further in Section 7.

21

“Another pillar of the new economy story is under threat. First, the
internet stock bubble burst. Then the hopes of an end to business cycles
were dashed by recent economic data from the US. And yesterday,
the predictions of permanent increase in productivity growth began to
look suspect.” (8 February 2001)
Of course, some of the rise in productivity growth that occurred in the US in recent
years can be attributed to the fact that output growth was high. An above-average
increase in output growth boosts productivity growth through higher utilisation and
through returns-to-scale effects. Although it is virtually impossible to accurately
estimate the precise impact of the cycle on productivity growth, some attempts to do
so26 suggest that a significant proportion of the rise in productivity growth that we
have seen cannot be directly attributed to the cycle.

Nevertheless, with the US economy having decelerated significantly in recent months,
it would be surprising if productivity growth did not decelerate for purely cyclical
reasons, without that having any necessary implications for the NE view that the
medium-term trend of productivity growth has risen.

We noted earlier that a significant fraction (perhaps one-third to one-half) of the
upsurge in labour productivity growth in the US can be attributed to an increase in
capital accumulation. We have already seen signs of investment spending growth in
the US moderating significantly, which, given its high growth rate in the previous
year, and with the stock market down significantly over the last year, is scarcely
surprising. If it were true that the stock market had been “irrationally exuberant”, it
would be surprising if some of the corporate investment decisions that were made
over the last 2-3 years were not similarly based on irrational exuberance. Hence, a
significant reduction in investment growth caused, in part, by a perception that some
over-investment had occurred could also significantly reduce labour productivity
growth. I have previously discussed Mandel’s (2001) view that the fall in the stock
market can be expected to be associated with a significant reduction in venture capital
finance. The associated slowing in innovation then reduces productivity growth.
What happens next depends, in part, on how the stock market reacts to the slide in
measured productivity growth.
26

E.g., Basu, Fernald and Shapiro (2000).

22

Significant share price (and investment) volatility around periods of significant
technological change is not unusual. In their discussion of the 1882 Electrical
“Mania”, Kennedy and Delargy (1997) calculate that the average share price of their
sample of quoted electrical companies fell by around 93% between the peak in 1882
Q3 and trough in 1884 Q4! Similarly, in discussing the electrical ‘mania’; in 1882,
the Economist newspaper27 recalled an earlier mania –

“The greatest invention of the century resulted in the railway mania
of 1845-46 … . . In August 1846, London and North-Western stock was
selling at 235, North British at 155 … . And never since, prosperous as
our railways have been, have such high prices been touched.”
The fluctuations in the stock market affected the ability of the electrical industry to
raise money, and thereby develop. Kennedy and Delargy (1997) point out that while
the prospective electrical supply undertakings raised over £2m at the height of the
mania in 1882 alone, they were only able to raise around £235,000 in the subsequent
five year period, and they contend that -

“The pace of electrical development paralleled the flow of funds into the
industry closely. By the time electrical investment began its feeble
recovery after 1887, British firms were already technologically
backward.” (p 76)
It is, though, easy to become excessively gloomy. Although share price volatility
probably affected the time-path of investment in, say, electrical undertakings, it did
not stop us from reaping the benefits of electricity eventually.

Similarly, notwithstanding the possibility that the downturn in share prices depresses
ICT-related investment for some time, one would still expect the benefits associated
with ICT-related developments to be realised over the medium-term. In that regard,
one might draw some comfort from a recent e-business survey conducted by the
CBI28 which found that 41% of companies reported that e-business was already
having a real impact on all aspects of the organisation, with 99% of respondents
expecting some impact in the next 2-3 years.
27

20 May 1882, pp 604-05.
“The quiet revolution: A report on the state of e-business in the UK”, CBI and KPMG consulting,
February 2001.
28

23

The proportion of turnover expected to be derived from e-business was expected to
rise significantly over the next 2-3 years (see Table 7).

TABLE 7
E-BUSINESS TURNOVER – CURRENT AND EXPECTED

PERCENTAGE OF
TURNOVER

CURRENT

ANTICIPATED

0%

38%

7%

1-5%

38%

14%

6-10%

11%

21%

11-20%

8%

20%

20+%

5%

38%

Source: CBI (2001)

It is also plausible that Mandel (2001) is too gloomy about the prospects for
productivity growth in the US. Many firms feel that they have not, as yet, taken
advantage of the new technologies at their disposal. Also, scientists claim that
Moore’s law is likely to continue to operate, so the falling price of ICT investment is
likely to continue to stimulate spending.

If it did turn out that a deceleration in GDP growth and/or the decline in share prices
did lead to a pronounced decline in productivity growth, then there will be many who
will proclaim that no sustainable increase in the growth rate of productivity had
occurred in the US. Indeed, I have already noticed some commentators declare that
the NE hypothesis will be seen to have failed if productivity growth in the US falls to
levels associated with past cyclical downturns. This is mistaken.

It is perfectly possible to envisage circumstances under which the NE has increased
the average growth rate of productivity, but also simultaneously increased its cyclical
variability. This could be true if, say, corporate investment had become more

24

sensitive to movements in the stock market than in the past. This merits further
investigation.

In addition, if we have had a period of over-investment, one would expect the
subsequent adjustment period to be characterised by unusually low investment, which
might temporarily depress productivity growth, thereby masking an underlying
improvement in the trend rate.

I fear that, therefore, some of the conventional methods of cyclical adjustment for
productivity growth may not be appropriate. For example, Gordon’s (1999) method
of cyclically adjusting labour productivity growth relies on a stable relationship
between detrended (cyclical) changes in hours and corresponding cyclical changes in
output. Yet, if the behaviour of, say, investment growth were different over this cycle
relative to previous cycles, then it is not obvious that the hours-output relationship
would remain stable. Also, recall that pre-war US business cycles were quite
different from the post-1945 business cycle. For example, recessions during pre-war
cycles were longer-lived, as they often arose from the bursting of speculative bubbles
in the financial markets, and recessions were associated with the elimination of
overhangs. By contrast, many of the post-war cycles have been associated with
inflation-fighting by the Fed. There are those who argue that the current cycle more
closely resembles the pre-war cycles.29

In any case, extrapolating longer-term growth trends on the basis of a period that
includes a significant cyclical downturn can be a rather unreliable way of estimating
long-term growth. Oulton (1995) discusses the hypothetical situation of attempting to
forecast US economic growth over the long term from the vantage point of being in
1937. Table 8 sets out the average peak-to peak growth rates over selected periods.
By focussing on the very recent period (including the Depression), the forecaster

29

While methods that cyclically adjust TFP growth rather than labour productivity growth (e.g. Basu et
al (2000)) appear to control the cyclicality of investment growth, recall that investment sometimes has
“spillover” effects on TFP, and also that an important part of the rise in TFP growth in the US is the
growth of the ICT-producing industries. Hence, a cyclical slowing in investment growth that was
disproportionate relative to the slowing of hours could appear to be misleadingly associated with a
slowing of the cyclically-adjusted TFP residual.

25

would have no idea that the US economy was poised to grow at the exceptionally
healthy rate of 4.6% over the subsequent 16 years. Indeed, the forecaster would have
got closer to the final outturn by excluding the Depression altogether, though that
would have been virtually impossible to do in 1937.

TABLE 8
AVERAGE ANNUAL GROWTH RATES OF US GNP

PERIOD

% PER ANNUM

1913-29

3.26

1919-29

3.48

1929-37

-0.25

1929-41

2.09

1917-37

1.80

1937-53

4.63

Source: Oulton (1995)
Note: 1913, 1929, 1937 and 1953 were cyclical peaks.
1919 was the first ‘normal’ year after World War 1. 1941 was the
last year before US entry into World War 2.
7 THE NEW ECONOMY, MEASUREMENT ERROR AND MONETARY
POLICY
I have discussed how the structural changes associated with the NE make it difficult
to assess the underlying rate of productivity growth, or the equilibrium rate of
unemployment (NAIRU). However, our problems are compounded by the potential
existence of measurement error. Indeed, I wish to offer some examples of
measurement error which have become more important as the amount of ICT
investment has risen, making the setting of monetary policy even more challenging.

I shall argue that the types of potential measurement error that I discuss below may
have led us to significantly over-estimate the degree of inflationary pressure in recent
years. There are those (see e.g., Krugman (1997)) who argue that the possibility that

26

we may be understating productivity growth through mis-measurement should have
no implications for our assessment of inflationary pressure as both actual and trend
GDP growth are understated leaving our assessment of the output gap unchanged.
However, I shall offer examples today where instances of potential measurement error
are seen to have a material impact on our assessment of “capacity utilisation” and the
NAIRU.

My first example relates to alternative conceptual measures of the capital stock.

7.1 ALTERNATIVE CONCEPTUAL MEASURES OF THE CAPITAL
STOCK
At the Bank, one of our methods of computing the supply potential of the economy
relies on summing the weighted growth rates of employment, the capital stock and
technical progress. Among other things, it is obviously rather important to use a
measure of the capital stock which reflects its productive potential when performing
this calculation. Different methods of obtaining a measure of the capital stock can
yield rather different results.

For example, current ONS estimates of the capital stock are a so-called ‘wealth type
measure’, where each item is weighted by its current asset price. While this is a valid
measure for balance sheet purposes, it will be less appropriate for an assessment of
productive potential, where one might want to compute an index of the volume of
capital services (IVCS hereafter) instead. Note that in the IVCS, each item of capital
is, in principle, weighted by its contribution to output (i.e. its marginal revenue
product) rather than its asset price. A consequence of using the IVCS is that it
increases the weight accorded to shorter-lived assets such as machinery, equipment
and software, relative to buildings. If the stocks of shorter-lived assets (e.g.
computers) are growing more rapidly than other types, then the IVCS will, in turn,
grow more rapidly than the wealth-based measure.

Nicholas Oulton of the Bank of England has computed a preliminary measure of the
IVCS, which may, for purely illustrative purposes, be compared to the wealth-based
aggregate (see Figure 3). Joint research with the ONS is ongoing on this issue.

27

Note that the IVCS estimate has shown a rather higher growth rate in recent years, a
period when we know that ICT investment accelerated. However, notice also that
there are periods (e.g. the early 80s), when the wealth measure of the capital stock
grew more quickly than the IVCS measure.

FIGURE 3
Non Housing Capital Stock
% y oy
Wealth based measure

7
6

IVCS

5
4
3
2
1
0
-1

80

83

86

89

92

95

98

Of course, there is no straightforward link between the rate of growth of the capital
stock and estimates of potential output because changing one’s view of the
appropriate capital stock will also affect one’s estimate of what economists call total
factor productivity (TFP, hereafter). Nick Davey and Jennifer Greenslade of the MPC
Unit at the Bank of England have examined these issues in the context of the Bank of
England’s Medium-Term Macroeconometric Model.30 Because they use alternative
capital stock data, various relationships have to be re-estimated. Their work is
ongoing, but some interesting results from their pilot study include the possibility that
the alternative capital stock data would have yielded a different picture for “capacity
utilisation” in recent years - see Figure 4, which displays alternative proxy capacity
utilisation series based on the wealth and the IVCS measures, respectively.31

30

They base their analysis on the November 2000 version.
Note that, in the Bank of England model, “capacity utilisation” is an estimated quantity provided by
residuals of a production function where the direct inputs are employment (measured in hours), the
non-residential capital stock and labour augmenting technical progress. Further details may be found
in Bank of England (2000). Davey-Greenslade re-estimate the relevant parts of the model to obtain the
alternative series displayed in Figure 4.
31

28

Although the two measures moved broadly in line until the end of 1997, they have
diverged since then. Hence, in 1999, the series based on the wealth measure
suggested “overheating” while that based on the IVCS suggested that there was still
some slack in the economy. Obviously, these two different views about the absence
(or otherwise) of spare capacity can have an important effect on an assessment of the
degree of inflationary pressure. Davey-Greenslade’s preliminary results suggest that
the use of the IVCS series for the capital stock instead of the wealth measure might
lead one to reduce one’s estimate of the extent of inflationary pressure implied by the
macroeconometric model in recent years. This may be, in part, because the
disinflationary impact of a higher measured growth rate of the capital stock more than
outweighs the inflationary consequences of somewhat lower measured TFP growth in
recent years. Of course, more work is needed in this area, which is true of most issues
relating to the NE. We await the results of the Bank-ONS project on the IVCS with
great interest.

I turn now to another example where the NE and potential measurement error-related
issues interact in a way that makes monetary policy formulation quite difficult.

FIGURE 4

Capacity Utilisation
0.020
IVCS

Wealth based
measure

0.015
0.010
0.005
0.000
-0.005
-0.010
-0.015
-0.020

94 95 95 96 96 97 97 98 98 99 99 100

29

7.2 ALTERNATIVE MEASURES OF ICT INVESTMENT

There are various subtle issues relating to the appropriate measurement of ICT
investment, some of which I discussed in an earlier speech (see Wadhwani (2000c)).
Nicholas Oulton of the Bank of England has applied US methods for measuring ICT
investment. He has used US price indices for computers and software, because they
incorporate a substantial amount of research into adjustment for quality change.
Because ICT products are extensively traded internationally, it is plausible that the
rate at which quality adjusted prices are falling should be much the same in all
countries (after adjustment for exchange rate changes). However, it should be noted
also that the measurement of price indices for computers is conceptually very
challenging due to the rate of technological change and no single approach of quality
adjustment is without its drawbacks.

Obviously, if inflation in computer and software is overstated in the UK, then real
growth has been understated, since it is money values that are measured directly.
Using US-style price indices should lead to higher estimates of ICT investment, GDP
growth and productivity growth for the UK (as we discuss below). In the recently
released National Statistics Quality Review report, there are some calculations which
suggest that using US price indices for the computer industry (but not changing the
assumptions regarding software), the level of industrial production in 2000 Q1 would
have been about 6% higher, with much of the gap being established in the post-1997
period. There are those who believe that the ?hedonic price indices used by the US
actually somewhat understate inflation, and this is clearly a controversial area.
However, on the basis that it is important to be aware of the quantitative importance
of alternative assumptions about price indices in the ICT sectors, I shall discuss some
preliminary illustrative estimates of the potential biases in estimated GDP growth
below.

Note that there are other important differences between ICT measurement practices in
the US and the UK which might also have the effect of understating the amount of
ICT investment in the UK versus the US.

30

For example, although the growth rate of nominal software investment (measured in
current prices) is very similar in the US and the UK, there is a large discrepancy in the
levels. Specifically, in the US, software investment has averaged 140% of computer
investment, while, by contrast, the corresponding ratio was only 39% in the UK.
Since people buy computers to run software, it seems very unlikely that there should
be such a large discrepancy between the UK and the US. This striking difference in
the estimated levels of software investment might arise because of differences in the
interpretation of what is investment, and what is intermediate consumption in
computer services – in the US, about three-fifths of the total products of the computer
services industry is classified as investment – in the UK, the corresponding proportion
is less than one-fifth.

In some interesting recent work, the head of the National Accounts Department at
INSEE in France, Lequiller (2001) documents the fact that the proportion of software
spending that is counted as being investment is substantially lower in the UK than in
several European countries (e.g. France, Germany, Italy and the Netherlands), though
he also points out that the corresponding proportion is higher in the US than in all
European countries that he considers. Work on this issue is ongoing at the OECD.32

Oulton suggests, for illustrative purposes, that it might be appropriate to inflate the
UK figure for software investment by a factor of 3, which is at the lower end of the
possible range of grossing-up factors considered by him. Of course, this is an
extremely difficult area, and because of the paucity of reliable information, what
might seem a conservative assumption to someone, might appear to be too high to
another. However, as a policymaker, it is important to be aware of the full range of
possibilities, and it is in that spirit that I look at alternative illustrative computations of
ICT investment. I also look forward to ongoing research into this issue at the ONS.

32

Interestingly, in a French context, Lequiller finds this software adjustment to be much more
quantitatively important than the adjustment for the much-discussed hedonic pricing.

31

Note that these adjustments imply that GDP growth may have been underestimated by
as much as 0.4pp pa over 1994-98. Importantly, for the assessment of underlying
inflationary pressure in the economy, the size of the GDP growth bias has grown over
time. Had the bias been constant over time, it would be unlikely to affect the results
from a conventional econometric model. However, the GDP growth bias has risen
from around 0.1pp pa for 1979-89 to about four times that in 1994-98.

Further, and perhaps even more importantly, the software adjustment implies that
nominal GDP growth has been understated as well as real GDP growth, and
consequently, the labour share might be lower than is conventionally measured. Of
course, in conventional macro-models (e.g. the Bank’s MTMM or Batini, Nickell and
Jackson (2000)), a lower labour share implies lower inflation. Hence, DaveyGreenslade find that allowing for the ICT adjustments in a macro-econometric model
can have important implications for the assessment of inflationary pressure.33 In
particular, they find that, other things being equal, using the alternative data instead of
the official data would have led to a lowering of the estimate of the NAIRU by around
0.5 percentage points in 1999 (see Figure 5), which could, if interpreted mechanically,
have altered a 2-year ahead RPIX forecast made in 1999 by as much as 0.6 percentage
points. Their estimates of the impact of using the alternative numbers on ICT
investment on the NAIRU has grown over time in recent years (see Figure 5), e.g. the
effect was close to zero in the early 1990s, so it is possible that we have overestimated
inflationary pressure to a growing extent in recent years.

33

It is important to emphasise that their result of an impact on the NAIRU depends critically on the
existence of a software adjustment, which affects the measured labour share. Of course, the muchdiscussed hedonic price adjustments have no implications for the measurement of the labour share,
since they leave nominal GDP unchanged.

32

FIGURE 5
Difference Between Estimates of the
NAIRU

PP
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

98

99

Note: NAIRU for Official GDP - NAIRU for Oulton variant

Of course, they have only undertaken a pilot study, so more research is necessary, but
standard economic theory suggests that the direction of the bias to the inflation
forecast should be in the same direction as what they find, though the actual estimate
might change.

Also, the preliminary estimates of the alternative data series are predicated on
particular assumptions and are designed to be purely illustrative. It is possible that
further work (with the active and essential cooperation of the ONS) might lead to
different point estimates of the size of the biases in GDP growth. However, the
direction of the bias in GDP estimates and the direction in which the bias is moving
seem relatively uncontroversial and as policymakers, it is important for us to be aware
of them.

One reason that I have spent so much time today on what might seem like a relatively
arcane discussion of the intricacies of how we measure things, is that I suspect that
this might, in part, explain why economic forecasters have overestimated the degree
of inflationary pressure while having simultaneously underestimated growth in the
1990s.

33

CONCLUSIONS

Today, we have discussed how the NE has changed some of the underlying
relationships that we rely on for the purposes of monetary policy, and have also
considered possible implications for how we measure things. However, we also saw
that some of the claims that have been made for the NE are far too extravagant. There
is much about the NE that remains uncertain, and therefore, I look forward to learning
more over the next few years.

34

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Ball, Larry and Robert Moffitt (2001) “Productivity Growth and the Phillips Curve”
John Hopkins University, mimeo.
Bank of England (2000) “Economic Models at the Bank of England”
(September 2000 update).
Basu S, John G Fernald and Matthew D Shapiro (2000) “Productivity Growth in the
1990s: Technology, Utilisation or Adjustment?”, Paper presented at CarnegieRochester conference, November.
Batini, N, S J Nickell and B Jackson (2000),”Inflation Dynamics and the Labour
Share in the UK”, External MPC Unit, Discussion Paper No 2.
Blinder, Alan S and Janet L Yellen (2001) “The Fabulous Decade: A Macroeconomic
History of the 1990s”, Paper prepared for Russell Sage/Century Foundation Project on
Sustainable Employment.
Blinder, Alan S (1997) “The Speed Limit: Fact and Fancy in the Growth Debate”,
The American Prospect, No 34, September-October 1997.
Bosworth, Barry P and Jack E Triplett “What’s New About the New Economy? ICT,
Economic Growth and Productivity”, Brookings Institute, mimeo.
Brown, W, Dickens, R, Gregg, P, Manning, A and S McIntosh (1991) “Everything
under a Fiver: Recruitment and Staff Turnover in Low Pay Firms”, Joseph Rowntree
Foundation, forthcoming.
Browne, Frank (2000) “Is there a New Economy?”, paper presented at
Oesterreichische Nationalbank Conference, June.
Corrado, Carol and Slifman, Lawrence (1999) “The Reliability of Aggregate
Statistics: Decomposition of Productivity and Unit Costs”, American Economic
Review, Volume 89, No 2, May, pp 328-332.
Crafts, Nicholas (2000) “The Solow Productivity Paradox in Historical Perspective”,
LSE, mimeo.
Goldman Sachs (2000) “Technology and the New UK Economy”, December.
Gordon, Robert J (1999) “Has the New Economy Rendered the Productivity
Slowdown Obsolete?”, North-Western University, mimeo.
Gordon, Robert J (2000) “Does the “New Economy” measure up to the Great
Inventions of the Past?”, Journal of Economic Perspectives.

35

Katz, L and Krueger (1999) “The High-Pressure U.S. Labour Market of the 1990s”,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1999, (1), 1-87.
Kennedy, William and Robert Delargy (1997) “Shorting the Future? The Financing
of the British Electrical Industry, 1878-1914”, Department of Economic History, LSE.
Kneller, Richard and Young, Garry (2000) “The New British Economy”, NIESR
(mimeo).
Kohn, D (1999) “Comment” in Taylor J “Monetary Policy Rules”, NBER.
Krugman, Paul (1997) “How Fast Can the US Economy Grow?”, Harvard Business
Review, July-August, pp 123-129.
Lequiller, Francois (2001) “The new economy and the measurement of GDP growth”,
INSEE Working Paper.
Mandel, Michael (2001) “The Coming Internet Depression”, Financial Times/Prentice
Hall, London.
McConnell, Margaret and G P Quiros (2000) “Output Fluctuations in the United
States: What Has Changed Since the Early 1980s?”, FRBNY
Nordhaus, William D (2001) “Productivity Growth and the New Economy”, NBER
Working Paper No 8096.
Oliner, S D and Sichel, D E (2000) “The resurgence of growth in the late 1990s: is
information technology the story?”, Washington, DC: Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve.
Oulton, Nicholas (1995) “Supply Side Reform and UK Economic Growth: What
Happened to the Miracle?”, National Institute Economic Review, No 154, November,
pp 53-70.
Staiger, D, J H Stock and M W Watson (2001) “Prices, Wages and the U.S. NAIRU
in the 1990s”, Paper prepared for Russell Sage/Century Foundation Project on
Sustainable Employment.
Wadhwani, Sushil B (1999) “Sterling’s Puzzling Behaviour”, Bank of England
Quarterly Bulletin, November.
Wadhwani, Sushil B (2000a) “British Unemployment and Monetary Policy”, Bank of
England Quarterly Bulletin, February.
Wadhwani, Sushil B (2000b) “The Impact of the Internet on UK Inflation”, Bank of
England Quarterly Bulletin, May.
Wadhwani, Sushil B (2000c) “Monetary Challenges in a New Economy”, Bank of
England Quarterly Bulletin, November.

36

