Bank of England
Edinburgh Speech - Press Conference
29th January 2014

Page 2
Edinburgh Speech - Press Conference - 29th January 2014

Nils Blythe:

So good afternoon, everyone, and welcome to this short press
conference. If you could just say who you are and where you're
from before asking a question - as you can see, lots of you here,
so just a single question. And who would like to ask the first one.
Jim?

Jim Naughtie, BBC:

The Scottish government's Fiscal Commission said that it
envisaged a framework which would allow full flexibility on fiscal
policy for an independent Scottish government. What you said
seems to indicate that you don't believe that would be possible if a
currency union were to work. Can you just take on that question
of full fiscal flexibility?

Mark Carney, Governor:

Well, I don't think it's appropriate for me to comment directly on
anything that the Scottish government has said or anyone from
Westminster has said related to these issues. And you can
appreciate, what I was looking to do - and hopefully accomplished
- was to set out what the core issues were, not just at a high level,
but also buttress them with some empirical and certainly
theoretical grounding, so others can then delve into them and
focus on them.
It is - so I'll make two general points in that context. Obviously and I'm specifically not commenting on the - where you directed
me. Every government - wherever they exist, anywhere in the
world - has constraints on their fiscal policy - constraints from
markets, constraints from just budgetary realities; and they have
to take those into account.
As part of the currency union, which is the issue I was trying to
address today, there are additional considerations which may
come into play, and on the fiscal side I pointed specifically to this
issue around moral hazard - I won't redefine it, it's defined in the
speech - and also the role of fiscal policy in smoothing

Page 3
Edinburgh Speech - Press Conference - 29th January 2014

adjustments to shocks, and how that might be best done and has
been approached in other instances. But those are judgements
for governments to make.
Andy Bell, Channel 5 News:

Governor, in a currency union would the Bank of England be the
lender of last resort for an independent Scotland?

Mark Carney, Governor:

Well, that is one of the issues, Andy, which would need to be
determined. And just to be absolutely clear, you know, we are a
technocratic institution. We have delegated responsibilities from
parliament; we fulfil those remits against those responsibilities
and we're accountable to parliament.
We don't make the decisions about those remits; we don't make
the decisions about the arrangements in the current union currency union - in the United Kingdom. We discharge against
those decisions to the best of our ability. And so whatever
arrangements were put in place, whatever changes were to
happen, we would fulfil them.
So the short answer is I can't answer your question, because it's
not for us to say.

Faisal Islam, Channel 4 News:

Governor, there's Table 4 in the back of your speech compares
the Scottish banking system's size to randomly chosen countries
- Cyprus, Spain, Iceland and Ireland. Is it the case that you feel
that an independent Scotland would be too small to host giant
universal banks like RBS?

Mark Carney, Governor:

That's clearly not what we said - or I said - in the speech. The
sizing of … there is a financial system here which is substantially
larger than Scottish GDP, as I mentioned in the speech, and a
banking system specifically which is the case. And it brings back
the importance of having in place - first and foremost, as you

Page 4
Edinburgh Speech - Press Conference - 29th January 2014

know, which is a point of broader application, Faisal, which is that
we - whether Scotland, the United Kingdom, Europe, the US,
Canada - we have to end too big to fail and we have to finish
these various reforms that are being worked through the FSB and
the G20 this year. So we have to do that in any regard.
However, even with doing that, there are residual calls on the
balance sheet, the national balance sheet, through the central
bank, but also an indirect link that becomes very much a direct
link because banks tend to hold the debt of their home country, at
least in substantial portion. And that needs to be taken into
consideration.
Others will judge about the sustainability of that. And I'm not
going to provide you with a conclusion on that issue.
Cameron Brooks, Press and
Journal:

I'm just wondering if you could break down into simple, basic
terms what you mean by some ceding of national sovereignty?

Mark Carney, Governor:

As used in the speech - well I gave examples of what that would
mean. So for example, if as part of a currency union there's an
agreement to fiscal rules - let's take the example of the United
States - US states balance budget requirements, that is a ceding
of state sovereignty, if you will, that is consistent in their system.
It's not a requirement, that wouldn't have to be a requirement in all
cases, but in their system that's consistent with reinforcing the
viability of the currency union in the US. So that would be one
example.
Another example would be if there's any pooling of fiscal capacity
- so joint backstops for a deposit guarantee scheme, as is being
contemplated in Europe.

Page 5
Edinburgh Speech - Press Conference - 29th January 2014

The bigger question, and I believe that sentence linked, or at least
was close to a discussion in the euro area - and this is a big issue
for the United Kingdom and a big issue for global financial stability
- is that ultimately, in our opinion, there will have to be significant
ceding of fiscal sovereignty within the eurozone, in order to make
the eurozone a viable currency area. And that's something that is
recognised in some circles in Europe, but there's very slow
progress at this stage towards that.
Ed Conway, Sky News:

It's really following up a couple of these other questions which is
to ask that - if you are the central bank and you're issuing the
currency which your member countries are using, is it
economically preferable in a positive economic sense to be the
lender of last resort to those economies, I mean from an
economic sense?

Mark Carney, Governor:

If the - all countries to a greater or lesser extent have some of
their currency used outside of their borders, and so one doesn't
want - you know that's not an absolute point. So for example, the
Federal Reserve doesn't need to be lender of last resort to the
global financial system. It did find itself in a position, however,
given - I apologise for the jargon, but it's true - given the sort of
currency mismatch position of major banks in funding markets, it
did find itself in a position where it was very much in the interests
of the United States to effectively, via other central banks, provide
close to lender of last resort type facility. It wasn't strictly lender of
last resort, but it was sort of extreme liquidity provision over the
course of a few years.
That is a difficult position to be in. The Fed absolutely made the
right decisions, but that is a difficult position to be in and it's
preferable to avoid being in that situation from a
structural-entering into that from a discrete decision as opposed
to an evolution of the way the system works.

Page 6
Edinburgh Speech - Press Conference - 29th January 2014

Richard Edgar, ITV News:

Governor, regardless of whether you think a currency union is a
good or a bad idea, your speech seemed to indicate that agreeing
one would be very difficult. Can you briefly explain why?

Mark Carney, Governor:

Well I didn't mean to suggest that. I merely meant to underscore
what the core issues were. And then I would suggest that it's the
responsibility of the parties to outline how they would address
those issues …

Richard Edgar, ITV News:

There's an awful lot of them ...

Mark Carney, Governor:

… I don't refute those issues as issues or outline how they - but I'd
be surprised if the former strategy were successful, quite frankly but outline how they would address those issues, and then others
can judge whether those proposed arrangements would be
successful.

Richard Edgar, ITV News:

It was a long list?

Mark Carney, Governor:

The three most important issues, yes.

Glenn Campbell, BBC Scotland:

Governor, if asked, if required, could you as Governor make a
currency union between an independent Scotland and the rest of
the UK work?

Mark Carney, Governor:

The Bank of England, which is a financial technocratic institution,
would implement whatever monetary arrangements were
decided to the best of our ability. We would also, as appropriate,
provide technical advice and context to those making those
decisions. But once decisions are made, we implement this;
we're not the ones who are elected to make decisions, very
clearly.

Page 7
Edinburgh Speech - Press Conference - 29th January 2014

David Clegg, Daily Record:

Just to pick up on some of the points made there - the timetable
for agreeing a currency union is 18 months from a yes vote for
independence, according to the Scottish government's timetable.
Does that seem realistic given the issues you've outlined today?

Mark Carney, Governor:

For others to judge, that's for others to judge.

Paul Gilbride, Daily Express:

Governor Carney, you gave three examples - three main
examples - for stable, successful currency unions US, Canada
and Australia, and you used them very much as a counterpoint to
the eurozone. Is it entirely a happy coincidence that those three
examples are nation states? If not, what are the reasons why it’s
such a stable currency union in those countries?

Mark Carney, Governor:

Well, I won’t make a political judgement. From an economic
perspective, I think what’s interesting and the point I was trying to
make, using the juxtaposition of the eurozone and those others, is
that there's - it’s not just about being similar, it’s about the
institutions. And so you can be relatively similar.
Now there are - you can disaggregate the eurozone more and
there's greater differences, but it’s more similar than one would
think in terms of industrial structure, not in terms of productivity
differences and things. So you can be similar and it doesn’t work,
and you can be quite different and it can work. And so what
matters is the institutional arrangements that are put in place
around the mobility of factors of production and goods, around
various aspects of a financial union, banking union, and obviously
fiscal arrangements.
Now nation states put all of those in place. But you will have an
attempt - you have an attempt that is very clearly not yet
completed at some risk to the global economy - the European and
global economies - you have an attempt with the eurozone to put

Page 8
Edinburgh Speech - Press Conference - 29th January 2014

in place a durable currency union - or I should be more positive, to
reinforce the currency union, to reinforce the euro with additional
measures which will likely require some ceding of national
sovereignty, and that’s clearly recognised.
But it doesn’t - I’ll leave it to the political theorists to determine
whether at the end of that the eurozone is a nation state as
opposed to nation states that have these arrangements which
create a truly viable economic and currency union.
Paul Gilbride, Daily Express:

So do you not have any examples of any currency unions which
aren’t nation states?

Mark Carney, Governor:

You only get one question; it’s a shame.

Laughter
Phil Aldrick, The Times:

I'm just going back to the lender of last resort issue. Would the
Bank of England be satisfied that banks like Royal Bank of
Scotland and Lloyds would be regulated by a Scottish regulator if
you were providing lender of last resort facility, given that the
opposite has been happening in the UK with the Financial
Services Authority being brought in house, it seems to be a
retrograde step?

Mark Carney, Governor:

I don’t think it’s helpful for me to speculate on post-September
arrangements, so I won’t. I’ll make the most general point which
is that we’re obviously very targeted in our provision of lender of
last resort facilities. It is that ultimately we’re putting - there are
protections that are taken, but we are putting the sovereign
balance sheet on the line. So we’re disciplined in our provision of
that. And then we’re quite liberal in the provision of the liquidity
for all the reasons you would expect, to this specific institution,

Page 9
Edinburgh Speech - Press Conference - 29th January 2014

because we’re trying to address a specific liquidity issue. Leave it
there.
Peter McMahon, ITV Border:

You spoke of tight fiscal rules. What would - if there were a
currency union - what are those rules?

Mark Carney, Governor:

Well sorry, Peter, that’s for others to decide what would be
appropriate. You know, I can point you to different examples. I
gave the US example which is one extreme. Obviously within the
eurozone there were fiscal rules that have proven ineffectual
basically because they weren’t respected and there wasn’t a
credible sanction against them.
In Canada there are not fiscal rules per se, but there is a very
active form of fiscal federalism, and very large transfers, and
large transfers from the federal government to the provincial
governments, and also quite a bit of a stabilising aspect to those
transfers as well as to employment insurance transfers which
compensate for the absence of fiscal rules.
So when you bring that back, it suggests that there are different
approaches that could work, but most cases what one finds is that
you can either have the more activist federalist approach, and
potentially if you have that you don’t need the fiscal rule. But it’s
been a little less successful just to have the fiscal rule without
some other arrangement.

Nils Blythe:

I think we’re out of time, so thank you all very much indeed for
coming today.

END

