The Economic Outlook: Fading global tailwinds, intensifying
Brexit headwinds

Speech given by
Gertjan Vlieghe, External Member of the Monetary Policy Committee

Resolution Foundation
Thursday 14 February 2019

I would like to thank Rodrigo Guimarães, Yad Selvakumar, Manveer Sokhi, Michael Saunders,
Ben Broadbent, Thomas Belsham, Mirko Licchetta, Matt Swannell and Thomas Viegas for help with data
and comments.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

We are in a period of unusual uncertainty around the economic outlook.
There is a tendency to say every quarter that things are more uncertain than before, and of course that
cannot always be true. It must be that sometimes uncertainty is less than it was before.
But where we are today, in the middle of the Brexit debate, and with the world economy slowing meaningfully
relative to a year ago, I do believe the UK outlook is unusually uncertain, and the nature of the uncertainty is
different (Figure 1). In addition to uncertainty about different economic drivers of demand or supply across
the economy, for which we have models and data, the range of current geopolitical risks is both less
amenable to quantifying in our framework and has more uncertain policy implications. And these risks have
been playing an increasingly important role in the evolution of the economy in recent months.
Figure 1: Global Economic Policy Uncertainty Index

400
350
250
200
150

EPU Index

300

100
50
0
2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

2018

Notes: Global Economic Policy Uncertainty Index (EPU) is a PPP-weighted average of national EPU indices for 20
countries: Australia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, France, Germany, Greece, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Mexico, the
Netherlands, Russia, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Each national EPU
index reflects the relative frequency of own-country newspaper articles that contain a trio of terms pertaining to the
economy (E), policy (P) and uncertainty (U).
Source: 'Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty' by Scott Baker, Nicholas Bloom and Steven J. Davis at
www.PolicyUncertainty.com

Setting monetary policy requires making decisions even when the outlook is uncertain. As I have said
before1, we do not need to anticipate perfectly all future changes in the economy in order to set monetary
policy appropriately to meet our inflation target. Rather, we need to respond to news about the economy as
we receive it, in a systematic and predictable way that agents in the economy can factor into their decisions.
Monetary policy will do what is needed to bring inflation back to target, whatever the path for Brexit and the
world economy.
I will discuss what news we have had about the economy in recent quarters, and how that has changed my
thinking about the appropriate path of monetary policy. This will involve a discussion of the world economy
as well as a discussion of the economic impact of Brexit-related news so far. Before wading into a
Brexit-related discussion during a period of heightened political sensitivity, I want to make something very
clear.

1

See Vlieghe (2017).
2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

2

For the UK’s voters and politicians, the Brexit debate is about decisions with significant long-term economic
and political consequences, and there is an important democratic debate on the possible trade-off between
them.2 Even if there is a strong consensus on the negative economic impact of Brexit, the magnitudes are
highly uncertain, particularly over the longer term. It is perfectly reasonable to have a debate about whether it
is worth incurring these aggregate economic costs to achieve certain political objectives. As an MPC
member, I am making no comment on this debate, which is clearly beyond the scope of monetary policy. I
will only discuss the short term impact on the economy, i.e. on growth, slack and inflation, because that is the
MPC’s mandate. It is important to be absolutely clear that my comments on the economic impact of
Brexit-related news over the monetary policy-relevant horizon, meaning the next two to three years, are not a
comment about desirability of certain Brexit outcomes over others. But the MPC does have to set monetary
policy while the Brexit debate is happening, and monetary policy works best if its rationale and intentions are
well understood.

1. World Economy
The MPC sets interest rates for the UK economy, not the world. But I will nevertheless start by discussing the
state of the world economy.
When the global economy is doing well, the UK usually tends to do well too. When the global economy is
sluggish, the UK economy tends to be sluggish too. Demand for our exports depends on the strength of
global demand, which in turn also influences UK business investment spending. Major financial markets are
highly integrated internationally, and because of the particularly large financial sector in the UK,
developments in international financial conditions are important for the UK economy.3
Since 2016, and throughout 2017, we had seen a remarkable acceleration in global growth. 2017 saw the
highest global growth in six years (3.8%). More than 80% of the world was growing above trend. The
Euro Area, our biggest trading partner, accelerated from just below 2% to nearly 3% GDP growth. And
across the world, growth was increasingly investment driven, not consumer driven, which makes for more
sustainable recoveries.
This strong global backdrop provided a global tailwind for the UK from the middle of 2016, just at the right
time, when a headwind of Brexit uncertainty started weighing on the economy.
But over the past year, the global economy has lost some of its momentum (Figures 2 and 3).4 Euro Area
growth has fallen back to just above 1%. Growth disappointed in emerging markets too. The US was the
outlier initially, with growth even accelerating in H1 2018. But in recent months, the data has shown some
loss of momentum in the US as well.

This is what economist Dani Rodrik (2007) coined the “political trilemma of the global economy”. For a country to achieve an increase
in democratic power and national sovereignty, it is necessary to reduce the extent of its integration into the global economy. We cannot
have all three – democracy, national sovereignty and global economic integration – in full measure.
3
See Gerko and Rey (2017).
4
See also Carney (2019).
2

3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

3

Figure 2: Global nowcast swathes from BoE models

Figure 3 : Breakdown of World PMIs

Notes:*Global GDP is PPP-weighted. The swathe consists of a range of the
Bank’s global nowcasting models. The models contain a range of global
and country-level survey measures and asset prices. Further information
can be found in “Gauging the globe: the Bank’s approach to nowcasting
world GDP, Quarterly Bulletin, Q3 2018”.

Sources: Eikon from Refinitiv, JP Morgan, Bank calculations.

Sources: National and International data sources, Bank calculations.

To make sense of this, I think we need two stories. One is about US fiscal expansion, the other is about the
trade war and geopolitical risks more widely.
The US economy has been going through a very large fiscal expansion. The total government deficit in the
US (adding up Federal and State budgets) is set to increase by 1.9ppts between 2017 and 2019, according
to the OECD. For comparison, over the same period the UK deficit is set to shrink by 0.5ppts, and the
Euro Area budget deficit is set to be little changed.
Figure 4: UK, US and Euro Area policy rates and market forward rates

Notes: Forward curves are estimated using instantaneous forward overnight index swap rate. Numbers are average
of last 15 business days. Fed funds rate is the target upper bound. Data as of 11 February 2019.
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg, ECB and Federal Reserve

The US fiscal expansion occurred when the unemployment rate was already at or near a 50-year low, which
led to US interest rates rising much faster than elsewhere in the world (Figure 4). This was a normal
monetary policy response to a stronger economy, and was appropriate for the US. But higher interest rates
4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

4

and a stronger dollar do put a lot of pressure on emerging market countries which borrow in dollars and pay
dollar interest rates, and whose economies were not strong enough to withstand such pressure. As a result,
we have seen emerging markets lose 19% of their stock market value from the peak in early 2018, and the
premium their governments have to pay to borrow in dollars has risen by 0.9 percentage points over the
same period (Figure 5).
The rise in US interest rates also started to affect some domestic borrowers in the US. The premium that
corporate borrowers have to pay for market borrowing has risen, and this rise comes on top of the increase
in risk free rates (Figure 6). 5 A pattern of rising corporate spreads when risk-free interest rates increase is
not unusual.6 The Fed has now signalled it may pause its policy tightening cycle, which has partially
unwound the spread tightening, but total borrowing costs including risk spreads remain higher than they
have been for most of the past seven years.
Figure 5: Emerging market equity and bonds

Figure 6: US credit conditions

Sources: Bloomberg, MSCI, Bank calculations

Sources: Bloomberg, MSCI, Bank calculations

The second main global growth story is the trade war and a rise in geopolitical risks more widely. The trade
war started just over a year ago when the US announced tariffs on washing machines and solar panels.
Since then, a series of tit-for-tat measures have resulted in a growing share of global trade facing steadily
rising tariffs. In an economic sense, nobody wins trade wars. You are just raising taxes on imports, and then
your trading partners do the same. Each country impoverishes their consumers, collectively they damage
global trade.
Bank of England staff estimate that the tariffs announced so far are already high enough to take 1% off
Chinese GDP and about 0.5% off US GDP over the next three years.

5

The chart shows credit default swaps, closely correlated with the premium over the risk-free rate that corporate borrowers have to pay
in corporate bond markets.
6
See Gertler and Karadi (2015) for evidence for the US and Cesa-Bianchi, Thwaites and Vicondoa (2016) for the UK.
5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

5

Figure 7 : China aggregate financing by type

Notes: Monthly GDP series is calculated using a linear interpolation between annual nominal GDP values in RMB.
Source: National Bureau of Statistics China, PBOC, OEC D, Bank calculations

Moreover, the trade war has hit a Chinese economy that was already slowing in response to official policy
measures to reduce financial excesses in the shadow banking sector. Growth in trust loans and entrusted
loans, two key vehicles for off-balance sheet financing, slowed in late-2017 and then turned negative in
2018, constituting quite a sharp deleveraging7 (Figure 7).
And the combined effect of this deleveraging and the trade war on China seems to be contributing to the
slowdown in the Euro Area via weaker exports in response to weaker Chinese imports (Figure 8).
Figure 8: Manufacturing PMIs – Euro Area and China

Sources: China National Bureau of Statistics, Institute of Supply Management

Politically, the trade war is not taking place in isolation, it is taking place against a background of more
fundamental political shifts, generally involving an erosion of trust in official institutions and a bifurcation
towards the extremes of the political spectrum. The US government just ended the longest shut-down in its
history, Italy’s debt dynamics are once again a focus for financial markets, and France is experiencing a

7

See the speech by PBC Governor Yi Gang on 13 December 2018.
6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

6

prolonged period of protests. An increasing number of countries have elected leaders that explicitly question
principles of free speech and due process of law.
Overall, these economic and political developments have led to a noticeable slowing in global growth.
Thinking about where we go from here, there are some reasons to be optimistic that global growth will soon
bottom out and improve a little. In recent months, the anticipated response from the Federal Reserve,
reinforced by Fed communications, has resulted in a 70bp fall in the forward policy rate8. The expected
Euro Area policy rate at the same horizon has fallen by 50bp. Forward rate paths for other central banks
have also been revised lower. Chinese policymakers have put in place significant stimulus measures in the
monetary, banking and fiscal sphere, and might add more.
But there are downside risks too. The US fiscal impulse has only just peaked, and is set to fade from here
(Figure 9). Uncertainties about the trade war do not appear to be close a resolution. And the wider political
uncertainties that may be weighing on financial market sentiment and investment decisions may well persist
for years to come, and could yet worsen.
Figure 9: BoE estimate of the impact of US fiscal expansion on US growth

Sources: US Congressional Budget Office, Joint Committee on Taxation of the “Tax Cuts and Jobs Act”, Bank
calculations

2. The impact of Brexit
Given the performance of the global economy – acceleration in 2016 and 2017, followed by some slowing
during 2018 – we would have expected a similar economic performance in the UK: a strong acceleration,
followed by some slowing.
Instead, we have seen UK GDP growth slowing throughout this period, from an annual pace of around 2% to
less than 1% annualised in Q4 2018 and Q1 2019.9 The reason for this underperformance relative to the rest
of the world is, I believe, the uncertainty surrounding the prospect of Brexit since the referendum in June
2016.
8
9

As measured by the 3Y-1M overnight interest rate swap.
Based on data for 2018 Q4 (first release of 0.2% qoq) and our current forecast for 2019 Q1 of 0.2% qoq.
7

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

7

Consider the following thought experiment: What if nothing unusual had happened in the UK domestically
and UK growth had been in line with its close historical relationship to the rest of the world? Figure 10
quantifies this thought experiment with what is known as a “synthetic” UK economy without Brexit.10 What is
shown here is how much weaker the economy has been relative to what we might have expected, given the
global growth data. The different lines in Figure 11 show estimates using different country groups, just to
show that the result is robust to which countries are used to proxy “the rest of the world”. The analysis
suggests that since the vote in June 2016, we have lost 2% of GDP relative to a scenario where there had
been no significant domestic economic events. That amounts to around 40 billion pounds per year, or
800 million per week of lost income for the country as a whole.11
Figure 10: Synthetic UK growth versus data

Figure 11: UK GDP Brexit shortfall versus “synthetic UK”

Notes: Blue swathe indicates the range of synthetic controls from All and
G7 control pools.

The pink swathe indicates the 95% confidence band for the Brexit
shortfall.12

Sources: OECD, ONS, Bank calculations

Sources: OECD, ONS, Bank calculations

Of course nothing in our trading relationship with the EU has actually changed over this period. These costs
are only related to expectations of future changes, and uncertainty about future changes. To better
understand how the economy has responded to these changes in expectations and uncertainty, it is
instructive to look at two large subcomponents of GDP, namely business investment and household
consumption.
During a period when business investment in the rest of the G7 has accelerated to around 6% annual
growth, the UK has been stuck around zero, deteriorating to -3.7% y/y over the course of 2018 (Figure 12).

10

I follow the methodology outlined by Born et al. (2018) and Abadie et al. (2003) to construct a synthetic control for UK GDP. The
synthetic control methodology is a constrained quadratic programming problem of which the counterfactual is more robust to
model-selection than that of an OLS regression. See the Appendix for a detailed description.
11
GDP shortfall is calculated as the median (50th percentile) estimate from the bootstrap methodology described below. Sterling
equivalents for the shortfall are calculated using annual 2018 nominal GDP for the UK.
12
The pink swathe represents 95% confidence bands for the Brexit shortfall, obtained by bootstrapping 1,000 synthetic controls from a
donor pool of 10 uniformly drawn countries (without replacement) from the 28 potential control units. Andrews (2000) shows that the
traditional bootstrapping methodology is inconsistent in the case of a constrained minimisation when the constraint binds. Born et al.
(2018) implements Andrews (2003)’s end-of-sample instability test as a solution to this problem and finds that Brexit has had a
significant effect on the level of UK GDP
8

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

8

Figure 12 : UK Business Investment relative to other G7 countries

Notes: Swathe denotes the range of business investment growth in G7 ex. UK countries.
Sources: Eikon from Refinitiv, National Statistics sources, Bank calculations

Firms have been saying in a number of surveys that the uncertainty about our future relationship with the EU
is a source of concern for them that has been weighing on their investment spending, as plans for expansion
have, on average, been scaled back (Figure 13).13
Figure 13: Decision Maker Panel results of Brexit as a source of uncertainty

Notes: Bars show responses to the question “How much has the result of the EU referendum affected the level of
uncertainty affecting your business?”
Source: Decision Maker Panel, Bank of England calculations

Moreover, as we approach the March 2019 deadline without a clear way forward, concerns have intensified
and investment has weakened further. That is not too surprising: when any potential change to the future
relationship was still many quarters away, there was relatively little firms could or wanted to do in
13

Evidence from the Deloitte CFO survey confirms the significance of Brexit as a major driver of risk facing UK businesses, who
continue to rank Brexit as the top risk facing their business. The survey also notes an increasing number of participants expect Brexit to
weigh heavily on businesses’ decisions to invest and hire. In addition, the January 2019 IHS/Markit PMI press-release notes: “The
survey results indicate that companies are becoming increasingly risk averse […] in the face of weakened customer demand and rising
political uncertainty. Such worries were in turn most commonly linked to heightened Brexit anxiety, though wider global political and
economic factors were also seen to have been taking their toll on demand”. See also Inflation Report – February 2019 for more details:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/inflation-report/2019/february-2019
9

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

9

anticipation. As many firms have told me during my regional visits in 2017, it was too costly for them to sit on
their hands and postpone major investment decisions for long periods. Business must carry on. But as we
get closer and closer to the moment when we will – or least might – learn more about what the future
relationship looks like, and how smooth the transition is, it makes sense for firms to put more spending on
hold. The cost of postponing investment by several years may be prohibitively high, but the cost of
postponing investment by a few quarters is a precaution that many find worth taking given the vastly different
scenarios possible.
The response of household consumption, on the other hand, has been quite different. Consumer confidence
had been fairly steady in the post-referendum period, with only tentative signs of deterioration in recent
months (Figure 14).
Figure 14: Consumer confidence in their own finances

Notes: Average of the net balances of respondents reporting that: their financial situation has got better over the past
12 months; their financial situation is expected to get better over the next 12 months; the general economic situation
has got better over the past 12 months; the general economic situation is expected to get better over the next 12
months; and now is the right time to make major purchases, such as furniture or electrical goods.
Source: GfK (research carried out on behalf of the European Commission) and Bank calculations

Even though households’ confidence was little changed for most of the post-referendum period, their real
income has taken a hit. The mechanism by which this took place was as follows. After the vote financial
markets took a dim view of the UK’s relative future economic prospects. Sterling fell by around 15%, and the
share prices of UK-focused companies underperformed by a similar amount. A weaker exchange rate meant
imports became more expensive. With some lags, this fed into consumer prices since around 30% of what
we consume comes directly or indirectly from abroad. Higher consumer prices eroded households’
purchasing power. But what Figure 15 shows is that even though household spending growth eased back a
little, it did not weaken nearly as much as real income. Households dipped into their savings to sustain their
spending over this period. That may be a sensible thing to do if the reduction in purchasing power is
temporary. But if it is permanent, we may at some point see households rebuilding their savings, which
would mean weaker consumption demand for a period.

10

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

10

Figure 15: Household consumption and real incomes

Source: ONS, Bank of England calculations

So UK growth in the past two years has been weaker than we would have expected based on the
performance of the global economy alone. Based on what happened in the rest of the world we would have
expected UK growth to accelerate, but actually it slowed. Brexit uncertainty weighing on business investment
was one factor. Brexit uncertainty weighing on the exchange rate, and therefore household spending power,
was another factor.
But despite the slowing in the economy, the labour market performance has been remarkably robust. The
unemployment rate has kept falling slowly over the past two years, reaching lows not seen since the 1970s.
Usually, as the unemployment rate falls, we would expect to see upward pressure on wages. It becomes
increasingly difficult for firms to find additional workers, so they end up having to bid them away from their
competitors. It becomes increasingly easy for workers to find jobs, so they feel more secure in making higher
wage demands by threatening to go work elsewhere.
In the initial phase of the labour market recovery, from 2012 to 2016, the MPC was generally surprised at
how little upward pressure on wages there appeared to be, despite the steady decline in unemployment. And
we have not been alone. This puzzling weakness of wages despite sharply lower unemployment has been
seen in other countries as well.14
As I argued in an earlier speech,15 my interpretation of this finding was not that wages had become
permanently disconnected from unemployment. Rather, I highlighted a number of factors that had pushed
down on wages for a given rate of unemployment. But I also showed evidence that, other things equal, lower
unemployment still pushed up on wages. In economist terminology, I argued that the Phillips Curve had
shifted down, but was still upward-sloping.16

14

See BIS (2017) and IMF (2017).
See Vlieghe (2018).
16
See also Broadbent (2017), Carney (2017) and Haldane (2017) among many others who have reached similar conclusions.
15

11

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

11

I also argued that some of the factors that had pushed down on wages for a given rate of unemployment had
mostly run their course17 so that upward pressure on wages should re-emerge.
Since the autumn of 2017, my MPC colleagues and I have described in successive Inflation Reports that
evidence of upward wage pressure resulting from a tight labour market has become increasingly apparent.
Wage growth accelerated from 2% in mid-2017 to 3% in mid-2018, and is now running at a pace close to
3½% on the most recent data (Figure 16).
This has been reassuring, in the sense that the mechanisms that have historically pushed up on wages still
seem to matter.
Figure 16: Average Weekly Earnings growth

Source: ONS, Bank of England calculations

What has been more surprising is that employment growth has remained robust even as business
investment has been falling. I do not have a confident explanation for this divergence. Historically, although
both data series are noisy, the two have moved together, as you would expect: when businesses are
confident about their prospects, they hire new employees and they invest in new equipment and buildings.
My tentative explanation for why we have seen divergent trends between employment and investment in
recent years is related to how firms deal with uncertainty: the reason why business investment is sensitive to
uncertainty is because much of business investment is irreversible, or at least costly to reverse.18 Buying
specialised equipment, or spending on specialised fitting out of new buildings, are costs which cannot be
fully recovered if economic circumstances change. Firms want to avoid making such investments at the
wrong time or in the wrong sector, so when uncertainty rises, it pays to wait. But employment decisions are
less costly to reverse. When uncertainty rises, but demand is still robust (from the world, from households), it
makes sense for businesses to meet that demand by expanding their workforce rather than by increasing
investment spending.

17

Among these were downward nominal wage rigidity (DNWR) no longer binding, underemployment falling towards pre-crisis level, and
public sector wage growth starting to pick up. See Vlieghe (2018) for details.
18
See Pyndick (1991), Abel and Eberly (1994) and Abel et al (1996) for the theory; Banerjee et al (2015) for some global evidence and
Smietanka, Bloom and Mizen (2018) for UK evidence on investment in the aftermath of the Great Recession; and Redl (2018) and Jens
(2017) for the role of political uncertainty.
12

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

12

If that is the correct diagnosis, it has several implications: first, the robust employment growth relies on
robust demand from the rest of the world and from households, at least one of which is slowing, so the
continued strength of employment growth cannot be taken for granted. Second, if we do get some resolution
of Brexit uncertainty, I would expect to see a pick-up in business investment growth, but not necessarily in
employment growth. Our own Bank of England Agents’ survey is consistent with this interpretation: on the
assumption of a Brexit deal, firms expect to expand output and investment, but not employment (Figure 17).
Figure 17 : Agents’ survey on Brexit expectations

Notes: Companies were asked “Relative to the last 12 months, what is the likely impact on the following for your
business over the next year in each scenario: (a) a deal and transition period and (b) no deal and no transition
period?” For each relevant business factor, respondents were asked to choose between “Fall greater than 10%”; “-10
to -2%”; “Little change”; “+2 to+10%” and “Rise greater than 10%”. Net percentage balances of companies reporting
increases or declines in each factor, weighted by employment. Half weight was given to the +/- 2-10% response and
full weight was given to those that responded “Rise / fall greater than 10%”.
Source: Bank of England Agents’ Survey

Note also that irrespective of the outcome of the negotiations, firms expect to increase investment outside of
the UK. That is consistent with the idea that even though firms expect investment will be stronger under a
deal scenario, we are unlikely to get back all of the investment that has been deferred over the past two
years. For now, however, employment growth has remained resilient, and it is leading to a tightening in the
labour market that is pushing up on wage inflation.
Ultimately, the MPC’s objective is consumer price inflation, not wage inflation. Consumer price inflation has
been coming down since late 2017 from a peak of 3.1% to 1.8% on the most recent data referring to
January. The decline reflects two factors: the temporary boost to imported price inflation from the 2016
depreciation is fading, as we expected. Second, the recent drop in oil prices is pushing down on inflation
temporarily, largely via lower petrol prices. But the MPC is mostly focused on persistent trends in inflationary
pressure, so the fact that one temporary upward effect (the weaker exchange rate) is fading, and another
temporary downward effect (lower oil prices) is manifesting itself, is not the most important consideration for
the medium-term inflation outlook. Much more important is the extent to which upward pressure on wage
growth will continue, and the extent to which this will ultimately lead to sustained upward pressure on
consumer price inflation as firms pass on the higher wage costs into the prices of their products and
services.
13

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

13

3. Monetary Policy
So far, the reduction in labour market slack and the rise in wage pressure, against a background of only
modestly slowing domestic growth and robust global growth and the assumption of a smooth Brexit, had
been sufficient to justify a modest tightening of monetary policy, with a first 0.25% hike in Bank Rate in
November 2017, and another in August 2018.
When I first spoke about the future path of Bank Rate a year ago, I thought one to two quarter point hikes per
year in Bank Rate was the most likely central case. But since then, the economic outlook has changed.
Global growth has slowed more than expected, and sooner than expected, so will contribute less to UK
demand. Domestic growth has slowed somewhat more than expected, especially around the turn of the year.
The only significant recent upside economic news has been the government’s announcement of increased
fiscal spending over the coming years.
And while pay growth has picked up broadly as expected, this has not so far led to any upward pressure on
consumer price inflation. For example, services inflation, which is less affected by the exchange rate and oil
prices, has remained close to historical lows.
I judge that the net balance of economic news has been to the downside. I therefore consider that the
appropriate pace of monetary tightening is somewhat slower than I judged it to be a year ago. On the
assumption that global growth does not slow materially further than it has so far, that the path to Brexit
involves a lengthy transition period in line with the government’s stated objectives, that pay growth continues
around its recent pace, and that we start to see some evidence of pay growth leading to upward consumer
price pressure, a path of Bank Rate that involves around one quarter point hike per year seems a reasonable
central case.
If a transition period is successfully negotiated, and a near term “no deal” scenario is therefore avoided, I
would expect the exchange rate to appreciate somewhat. The degree of future monetary tightening will in
part depend on how large this appreciation is.
As before, this future rate path is a forecast not a promise, and just as there is considerable uncertainty
around the forecast for growth and inflation, there is considerable uncertainty around my forecast for the
policy rate path. Given that the data even in the past few weeks are suggesting the slowdown is continuing
into the early part of this year, both domestically and globally, a lot needs to go right for this forecast to come
to pass. I feel I can probably wait to see evidence of growth stabilising and inflation pressure rising before
considering the next hike in Bank Rate.
So far, I have discussed an economic outlook where the path to Brexit is smooth, i.e. involves a lengthy
transition period. There is of course, the risk of a no deal outcome. Such an outcome is likely to lead to some
economic disruption, which could possibly be severe. This will not be the case for all sectors of the economy,
but some are clearly more exposed than others. The risk of a disruptive outcome, not just uncertainty per se,
is one of the key factors that are affecting business investment and financial markets. Reducing uncertainty

14

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

14

by making a no-deal scenario happen therefore does not produce net economic gains; it results in actual
economic disruption.
The question for monetary policy will still be: how do businesses, households and financial markets react to
such a scenario? The exchange rate is likely to fall further. That will create a temporary boost to inflation, just
as it did after the 2016 depreciation. Our mandate allows us to balance the likely temporary inflation
overshoot against the need to support the economy if a margin of slack were to open up. How much flexibility
we have depends on how much slack opens up, which is to say, how much demand falls relative to the
disrupted lower level of supply.
One can imagine scenarios where households and businesses expect the negative effect on the economy to
be quite persistent, so would lower their consumption and investment demand by more than the supply
disruption itself, given the extreme uncertainty and the fact that some disruption will actually be taking place,
rather than being faced merely with the worry about potential future disruption. Such a scenario would imply
that monetary policy should be kept on hold or even eased as long as inflation expectations remain well
anchored, and the exchange-rate driven overshoot in inflation can be weighed against the actual or
prospective economic slack, in line with the MPC’s mandate. One can also imagine scenarios where
households and business spending remains robust, if they expect the economic disruptions to be only
short-lived, so demand and confidence is affected less. That might imply that monetary policy might have to
be tightened.
All of these paths are possible, although not all are equally likely in my view. In the case of a no-deal
scenario I judge that an easing or an extended pause in monetary policy is more likely to be the appropriate
policy response than a tightening. We will have to judge in real time how well inflation expectations remain
anchored, and how households and businesses are reacting to the disruptions. Even if the direction and
scale of monetary policy changes are unknown beforehand, monetary policy will do what it needs to do to
bring inflation back to target within a horizon that is consistent with our mandate.

15

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

15

References
Abadie, A. and J. Gardeazabal (2003), “The Economic Costs of Conflict: A Case Study of the Basque
Country”, American Economic Review, Vol. 93, no. 1 pages 113-132.
Abadie, A., A. Diamond and J. Hainmueller (2015), “Comparative Politics and the Synthetic Control
Method”, American Journal of Political Science, Vol. 59, no. 2 pages 495-510.
Andrews, D. (2000), “Inconsistency of the bootstrap when a parameter is on the boundary of the parameter
space”,Econometrica, Vol. 68, no. 2 pages 399-405.
Andrews, D. (2003), “End-Of-Sample Instability tests”, Econometrica, Vol. 71, no. 1 pages 1661-1694.
Abel, A., and J. Eberly (1994), “A Unified Model of Investment Under Uncertainty”, American Economic
Review, Vol. 84, no. 1 pages 1369-1384.
Abel, A., A. Dixit, J. Eberly and R. Pindyck (1996), “Options, the Value of Capital, and Investment”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 111, no. 3, pages 753-777
Banerjee, R., J. Kearns and M. Lombardi (2015), “(Why) Is Investment Weak?”, BIS Quarterly Review,
March, pages 67-82
BIS (2017), “Exploring the wage Phillips curve”, Bank for International Settlements 87th Annual Report, Box
IV.A.
Born, B., G. Muller, M. Schularick and P. Sedlacek (2018), “The Costs of Economic Nationalism: Evidence
from the Brexit Experiment”, Centre for Economic Policy Research, Discussion Paper DP12454.
Broadbent, B. (2017), “Brexit and interest rates”, speech available at:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2017/ben-broadbent-speech-at-london-school-of-economics
Carney, M. (2017), “[De]Globalisation and inflation”, speech available at:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2017/de-globalisation-and-inflation
Carney, M. (2019), “The global outlook”, speech available at:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2019/mark-carney-speech
Cesa-Bianchi, A., G. Thwaites and A. Vicondoa (2016), “Monetary Policy Transmission in an Open
Economy: New Data and Evidence from the United Kingdom”, Bank of England Staff Working Paper No. 615
Gerko, E. and H. Rey (2017), “Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital”, Journal of the European
Economic Association, Volume 15, Issue 4, pages 721–745
Gertler, M. and P. Karadi (2015), "Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit Costs, and Economic Activity",
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Volume 7, Issue 1, pages 44-76
Haldane, A. (2017), “Work, Wages and Monetary Policy”, speech available at:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2017/work-wages-and-monetary-policy
IMF (2017), “Recent wage dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications”, World Economic
Outlook, Chapter 2.Jens, C. (2017), “Political uncertainty and investment: Causal evidence from U.S.
gubernatorial elections”, Journal of Financial Economics, vol 124, pages 563-579.
King, G. and L. Zeng (2006), "The Dangers of Extreme Counterfactuals", Political Analysis, Volume 14,
pages 131-159
Pindyck, R. (1991), “Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Investment”, Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 29,
pages 1110-1148
16

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

16

Redl, C. (2018), “Uncertainty matters: evidence from close elections”, Bank of England Staff Working Paper
No. 722.
Rodrik, D. (2007), “The inescapable trilemma of the world economy”, weblog available at:
https://rodrik.typepad.com/dani_rodriks_weblog/2007/06/the-inescapable.html
Smietanka, P., N. Bloom and P. Mizen (2018), “Business investment, cash holding and uncertainty since
the Great Financial Crisis”, Bank of England Staff Working Paper No. 753.
Vlieghe, G. (2017), “Good policy vs accurate forecasts”, speech available at:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2017/good-policy-vs-accurate-forecasts
Vlieghe, G. (2018), “From asymmetry to symmetry: changing risks to the economic outlook”, speech
available at: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2018/gertjan-vlieghe-speech-at-birmingham-chamberof-commerce
Yi, Gang. (2018), “China’s Monetary Policy Framework: Supporting the Real Economy and Striking a
Balance between Internal and External Equilibrium, speech available at:
http://www.pbc.gov.cn/en/3688110/3688175/3733126/index.html

17

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches

17

Appendix: The Brexit counterfactual
Quantifying the causal effect of the Brexit vote on the UK economy naturally requires comparing the data
outturn to a counterfactual. I address this problem, following Born et al. (2018), by creating a synthetic
control for UK GDP using a weighted average of a pool of other country GDPs. The identifying assumptions
of the analysis is two-fold. First, the outcome of the Brexit vote should not have had a meaningful effect
on the GDP of countries in the control pool. Second, the outcome of the Brexit vote should not have been
tied to the UK’s relative economic performance. The assumptions appear to be mild given the plethora of
non-economic reasons provided in favour of exiting the EU (see Born et al. (2018) for a further discussion
on the validity of the assumptions). Importantly, this approach simply exploits the statistical relationship
between the UK’s and other countries’ GDP and does not require having the correct economic model for the
UK or the World.
Data
The main data source for this analysis is the OECD November 2018 Economic Outlook projections.1 I take
quarterly data of real GDP in market prices starting from Q1-1995 of all the countries for which data exist,
and transform real GDP levels into log-deviations from the 1995 average. In the case of the UK, I update the
OECD projections for Q3- and Q4-2018 with the ONS data outturn.2 I redo the analysis for two control
units – “All” and “G7”– to check for robustness against control pools. Table 1 shows the countries that make
up the different control pools.
Methodology
Similar to Born et al. (2018), we use the methodology in Abadie et al. (2003) to construct a synthetic control
for UK GDP, defining Q2-2016 as the treatment period. Let the X1 be a pT ˆ 1q vector of the treatment
variable, X0 be a pT ˆ N q data matrix of the units that make up the control pool, and V be a pT ˆ T q
positive definite diagonal matrix, where T is the length of the pre-treatment sample and N is the number of
units in the control pool. Define Y0 and Y1 as the post-treatment analogues of X0 and X1 . The synthetic
control is a weighted mean of the units in the control pool, with weights W “ pw1 , . . . , wN q1 a pN ˆ 1q vector.
Choosing W is therefore equivalent to choosing a synthetic control. I estimate W˚ such that:

W˚ “ argmin pX1 ´ X0 Wq1 VpX1 ´ X0 Wq

(1)

WPW

where W “ tW : W ě 0; kWk1 “ 1u.3 It is easy to see that the solution of equation (1), W˚ , depends on
1 Since OECD November 2018 outlook was released before the availability of Q3 data, the synthetic control for Q3- and
Q4-2018 is calculated from OECD projections.
2 The results are almost identical when using OECD projections for the UK.
3 I implement this constrained minimisation in MATLAB using the quadprog function that is part of the Optimization

1

V, whose diagonal elements reflect the relative importance of the data in X0 and X1 in the T dimension for
the minimisation. Abadie et al. (2003) estimate V consistent with W˚ that best reproduces the treatment
variable in the pre-treatment period. For simplicity, I set V “ IN in the preceeding analysis. The results are
the qualitatively unchanged if I also estimate V as in Abadie et al. (2003) and Born et al. (2018).
The synthetic control for UK GDP is calculated as X˚1 “ X0 W˚ , and the causal effect of the Brexit vote
on UK GDP is given by Y1 ´ Y1˚ .
Comparison with OLS regression
A natural alternative of the synthetic control methodology is a simple OLS regression of UK GDP on the
control pool, defining the fitted values as the counterfactual. The key difference between the synthetic control
and regression methodology is that the synthetic control is a constrained minimisation with non-negative
coefficients that sum to one. The importance of this constraint lies in the possiblity that the regression
estimates can be negative, implying fitted values that are outside the convex hull of the data. This leads
to well-known problems of extrapolation with regression models. It can also be shown that inference of
counterfactuals outside the convex hull are more model-dependent. By constraining the regression such that
the weights are non-negative and sum to one ensures that the counterfactual is always inside the convex hull
of the data, and hence less model-dependent. This can be seen from the robust nature of the results in Figure
11. See Abadie et al. (2015) and King and Zeng (2005) for a fuller discussion and formal proofs.

toolbox. k¨k1 is usual 1-norm in the linear space Rn .

2

Table 1: Input countries used in estimation of synthetic control
All
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Chile
Czech Republic
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Korea
Luxembourg
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States

G7
Canada
France
Germany
Italy
Japan
United Kingdom
United States
-

3

