Speech by
ANDREW HALDANE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, FINANCIAL STABILITY
BANK OF ENGLAND

The Contribution of the Financial Sector
Miracle or Mirage?
at the Future of Finance Conference, London
14 July 2010
Text is taken from a co-authored chapter by Andrew Haldane, Simon Brennan and
Vasileios Madouros* in ‘The Future of Finance: The LSE Report’
published today by The London School of Economics

* We would like to thank Stephen Burgess, Melissa Davey, Rob Elder, Perry Francis, Jen Han, Sam Knott, Nick
Oulton, Peter Richardson, Jeremy Rowe, Chris Shadforth, Sally Srinivasan and Iain de Weymarn for comments
and discussion on earlier drafts, and Alexander Haywood and Laura Wightman for research assistance. The
views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Bank of England.

THE CONTRIBUTION OF THE FINANCIAL SECTOR – MIRACLE OR MIRAGE?

1. Introduction

The financial crisis of the past three years has, on any measure, been extremely costly. As in
past financial crises, public sector debt seems set to double relative to national income in a
number of countries (Reinhart and Rogoff (2009)). And measures of foregone output, now
and in the future, put the net present value cost of the crisis at anywhere between one and five
times annual world GDP (Haldane (2010)). Either way, the scars from the current crisis seem
likely to be felt for a generation.

It is against this backdrop that an intense debate is underway internationally about reform of
finance (Goodhart (2010)). Many of the key planks of that debate are covered in other
chapters in this volume. Some of these reform measures are extensions or elaborations of
existing regulatory initiatives – for example, higher buffers of higher quality capital and
liquidity. Others propose a reorientation of existing regulatory apparatus – for example,
through counter-cyclical adjustments in prudential policy (Bank of England (2009b), Large
(2010)). Others still suggest a root-and-branch restructuring of finance – for example, by
limiting the size and/or scope of banking (Kay (2009), Kotlikoff (2010)).

In evaluating these reform proposals, it is clearly important that the on-going benefits of
finance are properly weighed alongside the costs of crisis. Doing so requires an
understanding and measurement of the contribution made by the financial sector to economic
well-being. This is important both for making sense of the past (during which time the role
of finance has grown) and for shaping the future (during which it is possible the role of
finance may shrink).

While simple in principle, this measurement exercise is far from straightforward in practice.
Recent experience makes clear the extent of the problem. In September 2008, the collapse of
Lehman Brothers precipitated a chain reaction in financial markets. This brought the
financial system, and many of the world’s largest institutions, close to the point of collapse.
During the fourth quarter of 2008, equity prices of the major global banks fell by around 50% on
average, a loss of market value of around $640 billion. As a consequence, world GDP and world
trade are estimated to have fallen at an annualised rate of about 6% and 25% respectively in
2008Q4. Banking contributed to a Great Recession on a scale last seen at the time of the
Great Depression.
2

Yet the official statistics on the contribution of the financial sector paint a rather different
picture. According to the National Accounts, the nominal gross value-added (GVA) of the
financial sector in the UK grew at the fastest pace on record in 2008Q4. As a share of wholeeconomy output, the direct contribution of the UK financial sector rose to 9% in the last
quarter of 2008. Financial corporations’ gross operating surplus (GVA less compensation
for employees and other taxes on production) increased by £5.0bn to £20bn, also the largest
quarterly increase on record. At a time when people believed banks were contributing the
least to the economy since the 1930s, the National Accounts indicated the financial sector
was contributing the most since the mid-1980s. How do we begin to square this circle?

That is the purpose of this chapter. It is planned as follows. In Section 2, we consider
conventional measures of financial sector value added and how these have evolved over time.
In Section 3, we consider a growth accounting breakdown of the factor inputs which have
driven growth – quantities of labour and capital and the returns to these factors. This
suggests banking has undergone, at least arithmetically, a “productivity miracle” over the past
few decades. Section 4 explores in greater detail some of the quantitative drivers of high
aggregate returns to banking, while Section 5 explores some of banks’ business activities.
Risk illusion, rather than a productivity miracle, appears to have driven high returns to
finance. The recent history of banking appears to be as much mirage as miracle. Section 6
concludes with some policy implications.

2. Measuring Financial Sector Output

(a) Historical Trends in GVA

The standard way of measuring the contribution of a sector to output in the economy is GVA.
This is defined as the value of gross output that a sector or industry produces less the value of
intermediate consumption (that is, goods and services used in the process of production).
GVA only measures the sector’s direct contribution to the economy. The indirect
contribution of finance - for example, on productivity growth through the provision of funds
for start-up businesses and new investment projects - may also be important. But looking at
historical trends in value added is a useful starting point.

Chart 1 plots an index of real GVA of the financial intermediation sector in the UK from the
middle of the 19th century, alongside an index of whole-economy output. Both series are in
3

constant prices and indexed to 1975=100. Table 1 breaks down the growth rates of finance
and whole economy output into three sub-samples – pre-First World War, from the First
World War to the early 1970s, and thence to date. The historical trends in GVA for the
financial sector are striking.

Over the past 160 years, growth in financial intermediation has outstripped whole economy
growth by over 2 percentage points per year. Or put differently, growth in financial sector
value added has been more than double that of the economy as a whole since 1850. This is
unsurprising in some respects. It reflects a trend towards financial deepening which is
evident across most developed and developing economies over the past century. This
structural trend in finance has been shown to have contributed positively to growth in the
whole-economy (Wadhwani (2010)).

The sub-sample evidence suggests, however, that this has not been a straight line trend. The
pre-First World War period marked a period of very rapid financial deepening, with the
emergence of joint stock banks to service the needs of a rapidly growing non-financial
economy. Finance grew at almost four times the pace of the real economy during this rapidgrowth period (Table 1).

The period which followed, from the First World War right through until the start of the
1970s, reversed this trend. The growth in finance fell somewhat short of that in the rest of the
economy. This in part reflected the effects of tight quantitative constraints on, and
government regulation of, the financial sector.

The period from the early 1970s up until 2007 marked another watershed. Financial
liberalisation took hold in successive waves. Since then, finance has comfortably outpaced
growth in the non-financial economy, by around 1.5 percentage points per year. If anything,
this trend accelerated from the early 1980s onwards. Measured real value added of the
financial intermediation sector more than trebled between 1980 and 2008, while whole
economy output doubled over the same period.

In 2007, financial intermediation accounted for more than 8% of total GVA, compared with
5% in 1970. The gross operating surpluses of financial intermediaries show an even more
dramatic trend. Between 1948 and 1978, intermediation accounted on average for around
1.5% of whole economy profits. By 2008, that ratio had risen tenfold to about 15% (Chart 2).
4

Internationally, a broadly similar pattern is evident. In the US, following a major decline
during the Great Depression, the value added of the financial sector has risen steadily since
the end of the Second World War. As a fraction of whole economy GVA, it has quadrupled
over the period, from about 2% of total GDP in the 1950s to about 8% today (Chart 3).
Similar trends are evident in Europe and Asia. According to data from the Banker, the largest
1000 banks in the world reported aggregate pre-tax profits of almost $800 billion in fiscal
year 2007/08 (Chart 4), almost 150% higher than in 2000/01. This equates to annualised
returns to banking of almost 15%.

Some of these trends in the value added and profits of the financial sector, and in particular
their explosive growth recently, are also discernible in the market valuations of financial
firms relative to non-financial firms. Total returns to holders of major banks’ equity in the
UK, US and euro area rose a cumulative 150% between 2002 and 2007 (Chart 5). This
comfortably exceeded the returns to the non-financial economy and even to some of the more
risk-seeking parts of the financial sector, such as hedge funds.

To illustrate this rather starkly, consider a hedged bet placed back in 1900, which involved
going long by £100 in financial sector equities and short in non-financial equities by the same
amount. Chart 6 shows cumulative returns to following this hedged strategy. From 1900 up
until the end of the 1970s, this bet yielded pretty much nothing, with financial and nonfinancial returns rising and falling roughly in lockstep. But from then until 2007, cumulative
returns to finance took off and exploded in a bubble-like fashion. Only latterly, with the
onset of the crisis, has that bubble burst and returned to earth.

(b) Measuring GVA in the Financial Sector

To begin to understand these trends, it is important first to assess how financial sector valueadded is currently measured and the problems this poses when gauging the sector’s
contribution to the broader economy.

Most sectors charge explicitly for the products or services they provide and are charged
explicitly for the inputs they purchase. This allows the value-added of each sector to be
measured more or less directly. For example, gross output of a second-hand car dealer can be
calculated as the cash value of all cars sold. The value added of that dealer would then be
5

estimated by subtracting its intermediate consumption (the value of cars bought) from gross
output.

This is also the case for some of the services provided by the financial sector.1 For example,
investment banks charge explicit fees when they advise clients on a merger or acquisition.
Fees or commissions are also levied on underwriting the issuance of securities and for the
market-making activities undertaken for clients. But such direct charges account for only
part of the financial system’s total revenues. Finance – and commercial banking in particular
– relies heavily on interest flows as a means of payment for the services they provide. Banks
charge an interest rate margin to capture these intermediation services.

To measure the value of financial services embedded in interest rate margins, the concept of
FISIM – Financial Intermediation Services Indirectly Measured – has been developed
internationally. The concept itself was introduced in the 1993 update of the United Nations
System of National Accounts (SNA). The SNA recognises that financial intermediaries
provide services to consumers, businesses, governments and the rest of the world for which
explicit charges are not made. In associated guidelines, a number of such services are
identified including:



Taking, managing and transferring deposits;



Providing flexible payment mechanisms such as debit cards;



Making loans or other investments; and



Offering financial advice or other business services.

FISIM is estimated for loans and deposits only. The calculation is based on the difference
between the effective rates of interest (payable and receivable) and a ‘reference’ rate of
interest, multiplied by the stock of outstanding balances. According to SNA guidelines, ‘this
reference rate represents the pure cost of borrowing funds – that is, a rate from which the risk
premium has been eliminated to the greatest extent possible, and that does not include any
intermediation services.’2 For example, a £1,000 loan with a 9% interest receivable and a 4%
reference rate gives current price FISIM on the loan = £1,000 x (9% – 4%) = £50. And for a

1

For further details refer to, for example, Akritidis L (2007).

2

1993 System of National Accounts, paragraph 6.128: http://unstats.un.org/unsd/sna1993/toctop2.asp.

6

£1,000 deposit with a 3% interest payable and a 4% reference rate, this gives current price
FISIM on the deposit = £1,000 x (4% – 3%) = £10. Overall, estimated current price FISIM
accounts for a significant share of gross output of the banking sector (Chart 7).

Estimating a real measure of FISIM is fraught with both conceptual and computational
difficulties. In the earlier example of the second-hand car dealer, statisticians can use the
number of cars sold as an indicator of the volume of gross output. But the conceptual
equivalent for financial intermediation is not clear. Would two loans of £50 each to the same
customer represent a higher level of activity than one loan of £100? Methods for measuring
FISIM at constant prices are based on conventions. In the UK, real FISIM is calculated by
applying the base-year interest margins to an appropriate volume indicator of loans and
deposits. The latter is estimated by deflating the corresponding stocks of loans and deposits
using the GDP deflator. This method means that any volatility in the current price measure
of FISIM caused by changes in interest margins does not feed into the real measure.

(c) Refining the Measurement of FISIM
While the introduction of FISIM into the national accounts was an important step forward, it
is not difficult to construct scenarios where the contribution of the financial sector to the
economy could be mis-measured under this approach. A key issue is the extent to which
bearing risk should be measured as a productive service provided by the banking system.

(i) Adjusting FISIM for Risk
Under current FISIM guidelines, which use risk-free policy rates to measure the reference
rate, banks’ compensation for bearing risk constitutes part of their measured nominal output.
This can lead to some surprising outcomes. For example, assume there is an economy-wide
increase in the expected level of defaults on loans or in liquidity risk, as occurred in October
2008. Banks will rationally respond by increasing interest rates to cover the rise in expected
losses. FISIM will score this increased compensation for expected losses on lending as a rise
in output. In other words, at times when risk is rising, the contribution of the financial sector
to the real economy may be overestimated. This goes some way towards explaining the
2008Q4 National Accounts paradox of a rapidly rising financial sector contribution to
nominal GDP.

7

Of course, the financial sector does bear the risk of other agents in the economy. Banks take
on maturity mismatch or liquidity risk on behalf of households and companies. And banks
also make risky loans funded by debt, which exposes them to default or solvency risk. But it
is not clear that bearing risk is, in itself, a productive activity. Any household or corporate
investing in a risky debt security also bears credit and liquidity risk. The act of investing
capital in a risky asset is a fundamental feature of capital markets and is not specific to the
activities of banks. Conceptually, therefore, it is not clear that risk-based income flows
should represent bank output.

The productive activity provided by an effectively functioning banking system might be
better thought of as measuring and pricing credit and liquidity risk. For example, banks
screen borrowers’ creditworthiness when extending loans, thereby acting as delegated
monitor. And they manage liquidity risk through their treasury operations, thereby acting as
delegated treasurer. These risk-pricing services are remunerated implicitly through the
interest rates banks charge to their customers.

Stripping out the compensation for bearing risk to better reflect the service component of the
financial sector could be achieved in different ways. One possibility would be to adjust
FISIM using provisions as an indicator of expected losses. A broader adjustment for risk, as
has been suggested by several commentators, would be to move away from the risk-free rate
as the reference rate within FISIM.3 For example, a paper prepared for the OECD Working
Party on National Accounts (Mink (2008)) suggested that the FISIM calculation should use
reference rates that match the maturity and credit risk of loans and deposits. This would also
eliminate an inconsistency within the current National Accounts framework. Measured
financial intermediation output increases if a bank bears the risk of lending to a company.
But gross output is unchanged if a household holds a bond issued by the same company and
thus bears the same risk.

To see how such a mechanism would work, consider the following simple example. A bank
lends £100 to a corporate borrower at 7% per annum for one-year. The risk-free rate is 5%.
The bank correctly assesses the credit risk of the corporate to be A-rated. The market spread
for A-rated credits at a maturity of one-year is 1% over the risk-free rate. Current FISIM
would estimate bank output as £2 (Table 2). Risk-adjusted FISIM, though, would estimate
3

Wang et al (2004), Wang (2003), Mink (2008), Colangelo and Inklaar (2010).

8

banks’ output as £1.

An adjustment of FISIM along these lines could potentially be material. According to
simulations on the impact of such an approach for the Euro-area countries, aggregate riskadjusted FISIM would stand at about 60% of current aggregate FISIM for the Euro-area
countries over the period 2003-7 (Mink (2008)).

(ii) Measuring Risk
Adjusting FISIM for risk would better capture the contribution of the financial sector to the
economy. The fundamental problem is, however, that risk itself is unobservable ex-ante.
The methodology described above measures risk in a relative way; it effectively assumes that
if banks deviate from prevailing market rates, this is to compensate for the services they
provide to borrowers and depositors. But at no point is there an assessment of the ability of
the financial system to price risk correctly in an absolute sense. This might not be the
objective of statisticians when measuring output. But it is essential when gauging the
contribution of finance to economic well-being.

To see this more clearly, consider an alternative example (Table 3). A bank lends £100 to a
corporate borrower. But the bank incorrectly assesses the credit risk of the corporate to be Arated, when the true credit risk is BB-rated. Assume for simplicity that the corporate,
knowing that its credit risk is greater than A, is prepared to pay a spread higher than that on
an A-rated credit risk (say 2%). The market spreads for A-rated and BB-rated credits are 1%
and 2% respectively. “Measured” risk-adjusted FISIM is still an improvement on current
FISIM. But the value of bank output is still overstated relative to “true” risk-adjusted FISIM.

This would be equivalent to second-car hand dealers consistently selling lemons. But a
dodgy car-seller would be quickly found out. Mechanical risk is observable. Dealers that
persistently mis-price cars would be driven from the market. Buyers might instead then
choose to meet online.

A banking system that does not accurately assess and price risk is not adding much value to
the economy. Buyers and sellers of risk could meet instead in capital markets – as they have,
to some extent, following the crisis. But unlike the condition of a car, risk is unobservable.
So mis-pricing of risk, and mis-measurement of the services banks provide to the real
9

economy, may persist. This echoes events in the run-up to crisis when market prices
systematically under-priced risk for a number of years. Using the market price of risk would
have led statisticians systematically to overstate the potential contribution of the financial
sector over this period.

Attempting to adjust the measurement of bank output for risk by changing the reference rate
in FISIM is an improvement on current practices. But it would still fall short of assessing
whether the financial sector is pricing risk correctly and hence assessing the true value of the
services banks provides to the wider economy. Unless the price of risk can be evaluated, it
seems unlikely the contribution of the financial sector to the economy can be measured with
accuracy.

3. Decomposing the Contribution of the Financial Sector – the Productivity “Miracle”

To that end, an alternative way of looking at the contribution of the financial sector is through
inputs to the production process. This might shed more light on the sources of the rapid
growth in finance. Was this expansion accompanied by a rising share of resources employed
by finance relative to the rest of the economy? Or did it instead reflect unusually high returns
to these factors of production? This section considers these questions in turn.

(a) Growth accounting decomposition

The basic growth accounting framework breaks down the sources of economic growth into
the contributions from increases in the inputs to production, capital and labour. This amounts
to relating growth in GDP to growth in labour input and in various capital services (from
buildings, vehicles, computers and other resources). When these factors have all been
accounted for, the remainder is often attributed to technical change – the so-called Solow
residual (Solow (1957)).

The growth accounting framework assumes an underlying aggregate production function. In
its most basic form, the aggregate production function can be written as:
Q  f ( K , L, t )

10

where Q is output, K and L represent capital and labour units and t appears in f to allow for
technical change.

Assuming constant returns to scale, perfect competition (so that factors of production are paid
their marginal products) and Hicks-neutral technical change (so that shifts in the production
function do not affect marginal rates of substitution between inputs), output growth can be
expressed as a weighted sum of the growth rates of inputs and an additional term that
captures shifts over time in the production technology. The weights for the input growth
rates are the respective shares in total input payments – the labour and capital shares. More
specifically:








Q A
K
L
 K
L
Q A
K
L
where A(t) is a multiplicative factor in the production function capturing technical change.

 K ,  L represent respectively the capital and labour shares of income.

Charts 8 and 9 look at the proportion of labour and physical capital employed by the financial
intermediation sector in the UK relative to the whole economy over the past forty years.
They follow a not dissimilar path, with both labour and capital inputs rising as a share of the
whole economy for much of the period. The proportion of labour employed by finance rises
by around 50% between 1977 and 1990, while the proportion of capital almost trebles from
4% to 12% over the same period. Financial liberalisation over the period drew factors of
production into finance, both labour and capital, on a fairly dramatic scale.

Perhaps the most striking development, however, is what happens next. These trends have
not persisted during this century. If anything, the labour and capital shares of the financial
sector have been on a gently declining path over this period. Growth in both labour and
capital employed in the financial sector has been modest and has been lower than in the
economy as a whole. Since this fall in factor input shares coincides with a period when
measured value-added of the financial sector was rising sharply, this suggests something
dramatic must have been happening to productivity in finance – the Solow residual.

The measured residual, in a growth accounting sense, reflects improvements in the total
factor productivity (TFP) of the inputs. A growth accounting decomposition suggests that
measured TFP growth in the financial sector averaged about 2.2% per year between 1995 and
2007 (Chart 10). This comfortably exceeds TFP growth at the whole-economy level,
11

estimated at an average of about 0.5-1.0% over the same period. In other words, on the face
of it at least, there is evidence of the financial sector having undergone something of a
“productivity miracle” during this century. This pattern has not been specific to the UK.
Measured TFP growth in the financial sector exceeded that of the whole economy across
many developed countries between 1995-2007, a trend that accelerated in the ‘bubble’ years
of 2003-2007 (Chart 11).

(b) Returns to factors of production

TFP in a growth framework is no more than an accounting residual. It provides no
explanation of the measured productivity “miracle” in finance. A related question is whether
the observed productivity miracle was reflected in returns to the factors of production in
finance. Chart 12 decomposes total GVA of financial corporations into income flowing to
labour (defined to include employees only) and income flowing to capital. Broadly speaking,
the rise in GVA is equally split between the returns to labour (employee compensation) and
to capital (gross operating surplus). The miracle has been reflected in the returns to both
labour and capital, if not in the quantities of these factors employed.

For labour, these high returns are evident both in cross-section and time-series data. Chart 13
shows average weekly earnings across a range of sectors in the UK in 2007. Financial
intermediation is at the top of the table, with weekly average earnings roughly double those
of the whole-economy median. This differential widened during this century, broadly
mirroring the accumulation of leverage within the financial sector (Chart 14).

The time-series evidence is in some respects even more dramatic. Philippon and Reshef
(2009) have undertaken a careful study of “excess” wages in the US financial industry since
the start of the previous century, relative to a benchmark wage. Chart 15 plots their measure
of excess wages. This shows a dramatic spike upwards which commenced in the early 1980s,
but which exploded from the 1990s onwards. The only equivalent wage spike was in the runup to the Great Crash in 1929. Philippon and Reshef attribute both of these wage spikes to
financial deregulation.

This picture is broadly mirrored when turning from returns to labour to returns to capital. In
the 1950s gross profitability of the financial sector relative to capital employed was broadly
in line with the rest of the economy (Chart 16). But since then, and in particular over the past
12

decade, returns to capital have far outpaced those at an economy-wide level.

Chart 17 plots UK banks’ return on equity capital (ROE) since 1920 (Alessandri and Haldane
(2009)). Although conceptually a different measure of returns to capital, the broad message
is the same. Trends in ROE are clearly divided into two periods. In the period up until
around 1970, ROE in banking was around 7% with a low variance. In other words, returns to
finance broadly mimicked those in the economy as whole, in line with the gamble payoffs in
Chart 6. But the 1970s mark a regime shift, with the ROE in banking roughly trebling to over
20%, again in line with gamble payoffs. Excess returns accumulated to capital as well as
labour.

These returns were by no means unique to UK banks. Chart 18 plots ROEs for major
internationally active banks in the US and Europe during this century. Two features are
striking. First, the level of ROEs was consistently at or above 20% and on a rising trend up
until the crisis. This is roughly double ROEs in the non-financial sector over the period.
Second, the degree of cross-country similarity in these ROE profiles is striking. This, too, is
no coincidence. During much of this period, banks internationally were engaged in a highly
competitive ROE race. Therein lies part of the explanation for these high returns to labour
and capital in banking.

4. Explaining Aggregate Returns in Banking – Excess Returns and Risk Illusion

How do we explain these high, but temporary, excess returns to finance which appear to have
driven the growing contribution of the financial sector to aggregate economic activity? In
this section we discuss potential balance sheet strategies which may have contributed to these
rents. Essentially, high returns to finance may have been driven by banks assuming higher
risk. Banks’ profits, like their contribution to GDP, may have been flattered by the mismeasurement of risk.

The crisis has subsequently exposed the extent of this increased risk-taking by banks. In
particular, three (often related) balance sheet strategies for boosting risks and returns to
banking were dominant in the run-up to crisis:



increased leverage, on and off-balance sheet;



increased share of assets held at fair value; and
13



writing deep out-of-the-money options.

What each of these strategies had in common was that they generated a rise in balance sheet
risk, as well as return. As importantly, this increase in risk was to some extent hidden by the
opacity of accounting disclosures or the complexity of the products involved. This resulted
in a divergence between reported and risk-adjusted returns. In other words, while reported
ROEs rose, risk-adjusted ROEs did not (Haldane (2009)).

To some extent, these strategies and their implications were captured to a degree in
performance measures. For example, the rise in reported average ROEs of banks over the
past few decades occurred alongside a rise in its variability. At the same time as average
ROEs in banking were trebling, so too was their standard deviation (Chart 17). In that sense,
the banking “productivity miracle” may have been, at least in part, a mirage – a simple, if
dramatic, case of risk illusion by banks, investors and regulators.

(a) Increased leverage

Banks’ balance sheets have grown dramatically in relation to underlying economic activity
over the past century. Charts 19 and 20 plot this ratio for the UK and the US over the past
130 years. For the US, there has been a secular rise in banks’ assets from around 20% to over
100% of GDP. For the UK, a century of flat-lining at around 50% of GDP was broken in the
early 1970s, since when banks’ assets in relation to national income have risen tenfold to over
500% of GDP.

This century has seen an intensification of this growth. According to data compiled by the
Banker, the balance sheets of the world’s largest 1000 banks increased by around 150%
between 2001 and 2009 (Chart 21). In cross-section terms, the scale of assets in the banking
system now dwarfs that in other sectors. Looking at the size of the largest firm’s assets in
relation to GDP across a spectrum of industries, finance is by far the largest (Chart 22).

The extent of balance sheet growth was, if anything, understated by banks’ reported assets.
Accounting and regulatory policies permitted banks to place certain exposures off-balance
sheet, including special purpose vehicles and contingent credit commitments. Even
disclosures of on-balance sheet positions on derivatives disguised some information about
banks’ contingent exposures.
14

This rapid expansion of the balance sheet of the banking system was not accompanied by a
commensurate increase in its equity base. Over the same 130 year period, the capital ratios of
banks in the US and UK fell from around 15-25% at the start of the 20th century to around 5%
at its end (Chart 23). In other words, on this metric measures of balance sheet leverage rose
from around 4-times equity capital in the early part of the previous century to around 20
times capital at the end.

If anything, the pressure to raise leverage increased further moving into this century.
Measures of gearing rose sharply between 2000 and 2008 among the major global banks,
other than US commercial banks which were subject to a leverage ratio constraint (Chart 24).
Once adjustments are made to on- and off-balance sheet assets and capital to give a more
comprehensive cross-country picture, levels of gearing are even more striking. Among the
major global banks in the world, levels of leverage were on average more than 50 times
equity at the peak of the boom (Chart 25).

For a given return on assets (RoA), higher leverage mechanically boosts a banks’ ROE. The
decision by many banks to increase leverage appears to have been driven, at least in part, by a
desire to maintain ROE relative to competitors, even as RoA fell. For example, as Chart 26
illustrates, virtually all of the increase in the ROE of the major UK banks during this century
appears to have been the result of higher leverage. Banks’ return on assets – a more precise
measure of their productivity – was flat or even falling over this period.

Between 1997 and 2008, as UK banks increased leverage, they managed to maintain broadly
constant capital ratios by, on average, seeking out assets with lower risk weights (Chart 27).
A similar pattern was evident among a number of the Continental European major global
banks (Chart 28). It is possible to further decompose ROE to provide additional insight into
how banks increased reported returns as follows:

RoE

=

Total assets
Tier 1 capital

X

Tier 1 capital
Common equity

x

Net income
RWAs

x

RWAs
Total assets

RoE

=

Financial leverage

X

Common equity margin

x

RoRWAs

x

Unit-risk

15

(1.1)

Banks can boost ROE by acting on any of the terms on the right-hand side of equation (1.1):
increasing assets relative to capital (financial leverage), holding a larger proportion of capital4
other than as common equity (common equity margin), or assuming a greater degree of risk
per unit of assets (return on risk-weighted assets, RoRWA) – leveraging assets, leveraging
capital structure or leveraging regulation.

Table 4 shows two of the elements of this breakdown for the major global banks – leverage
and unit risk. For most banks, the story is one of a significant increase in assets relative to
capital, with little movement into higher risk assets (unit risk makes a negative contribution
for most banks). Those banks with highest leverage, however, are also the ones which have
subsequently reported the largest write-downs. That suggests banks may also have invested
in riskier assets, which regulatory risk-weights had failed to capture.

Table 5 looks at the third component, the common equity margin, of some of the same global
banks. Among at least some of these banks, this margin makes a significant contribution to
ROE growth, as banks moved into hybrid Tier 1 capital instruments at the expense of core
equity. As such hybrid instruments have shown themselves largely unable to absorb losses
during the crisis, this boost to ROE is also likely to have been an act of risk illusion.

Taken together, this evidence suggests that much of the “productivity miracle” of high ROEs
in banking appear to have been the result not of productivity gains on the underlying asset
pool, but rather a simple leveraging up of the underlying equity in the business.

(b) Larger trading books

A second strategy pursued by a number of banks in the run-up to crisis was to increase their
assets held at fair value, principally through their trading books, relative to their banking
books of underlying loans. Among the major global banks, the share of loans to customers in
total assets fell from around 35% in 2000 to 29% by 2007 (Chart 29). Over the same period,
trading book asset shares almost doubled from 20% to almost 40%. These large trading
books were associated with high leverage among the world’s largest banks (Chart 30).

4

The term “Tier 1 capital” refers to the component of banks’ regulatory capital comprising common equity and
capital instruments close to common equity (“hybrid Tier 1 capital”), as defined by rules set out by regulators.
For a discussion of the composition of UK banks’ regulatory capital see Bank of England (2009a).

16

What explains this shift in portfolio shares? Regulatory arbitrage appears to have been a
significant factor. Trading book assets tended to attract risk weights appropriate for dealing
with market but not credit risk. This meant it was capital-efficient for banks to bundle loans
into tradable structured credit products for onward sale. Indeed, by securitising assets in this
way, it was hypothetically possible for two banks to swap their underlying claims but for both
firms to claim capital relief. The system as a whole would then be left holding less capital,
even though its underlying exposures were identical. When the crisis came, tellingly losses
on structured products were substantial (Chart 31).

A further amplifying factor is that trading books are marked-to-market and any gains or
losses taken through to the profit and loss account. So holding a large trading book is a very
good strategy when underlying asset prices in the economy are rising rapidly. This was
precisely the set of the circumstances facing banks in the run-up to crisis, with asset prices
driven higher by a search for yield among investors. In effect, this rising tide of asset price
rises was booked as marked-to-market profits by banks holding assets in their trading book.
Everyone, it appeared, was a winner.

But because these gains were driven by a mis-pricing of risk in the economy at large, trading
book profits were in fact largely illusory. Once asset prices went into reverse during 2008 as
risk was re-priced, trading book losses quickly materialised. Write-downs on structured
products totalled $210 billion among the major global banks in 2008 alone.

(c) Writing deep out-of-the-money options

A third strategy, which boosted returns by silently assuming risk, arises from offering tail risk
insurance. Banks can in a variety of ways assume tail risk on particular instruments – for
example, by investing in high-default loan portfolios, the senior tranches of structured
products or writing insurance through credit default swap (CDS) contracts. In each of these
cases, the investor earns an above-normal yield or premium from assuming the risk. For as
long as the risk does not materialise, returns can look riskless – a case of apparent “alpha”.
Until, that is, tail risk manifests itself, at which point losses can be very large.

There are many examples of banks pursuing essentially these strategies in the run-up to crisis.
For example, investing in senior tranches of sub-prime loan securitisations is, in effect,
17

equivalent to writing deep-out-of-the-money options, with high returns except in those tail
states of the world when borrowers default en masse. It is unsurprising that issuance of assetbacked securities, including sub-prime RMBS (residential mortgage-backed securities), grew
dramatically during the course of this century, easily outpacing Moore’s Law (the benchmark
for the growth in computing power since the invention of the transistor) (Chart 32).5

Tranched structured products, such as CDOs (collateralised debt obligations) and CLOs
(collateralised loan obligations), generate a similar payoff profile for investors to sub-prime
loans, yielding a positive return in stable states of the world – apparent alpha – and a large
negative return in adverse states. Volumes outstanding of CDOs and CLOs also grew at a
rate in excess of Moore’s Law for much of this century. The resulting systematic mis-pricing
of, in particular, the super-senior tranches of these securities was a significant source of
losses to banks during the crisis, with ratings downgrades large and frequent (Chart 33).

A similar risk-taking strategy was the writing of explicit insurance contracts against such tail
risks, for example through CDS. These too grew very rapidly ahead of crisis (Chart 34).
Again, the writers of these insurance contracts gathered a steady source of premium income
during the good times – apparently “excess returns”. But this was typically more than offset
by losses once bad states materialised. This, famously, was the strategy pursued by some of
the monoline insurers and by AIG. For example, AIG’s capital market business, which
included its ill-fated financial products division, reported total operating income of $2.3
billion in the run-up to crisis from 2003 to 2006, but reported operating losses of around $40
billion in 2008 alone.

What all of these strategies had in common was that they involved banks assuming risk in the
hunt for yield – risk that was often disguised because it was parked in the tail of the return
distribution. Excess returns – from leverage, trading books and out-of-the-money options –
were built on an inability to measure and price risk. The productivity miracle was in fact a
risk illusion. In that respect, mis-measurement of the contribution of banking in the National
Accounts and the mis-measurement of returns to banking in their own accounts have a
common underlying cause.

5

Moore’s Law refers to the observation by Intel co-founder Gordon Moore in 1965 that transistor density on
integrated circuits had doubled every year since the integrated circuit was invented and the prediction that this
would continue.

18

5. Explaining Disaggregated Returns to Banking

A distinct, but complementary, explanation of high returns to banking is that they reflect
structural features of the financial sector. For example, measures of market concentration are
often used as a proxy for the degree of market power producers have over consumers. It is
telling that measures of the concentration of the banking sector have increased dramatically
over the course of the past decade, coincident with the rise in banking returns. Chart 35 plots
the share of total bank assets of the largest three banks in the US since the 1930s. Having
flat-lined up until the 1990s, the top 3 share has since roughly tripled. A similar trend is
evident in the UK (where the share of the top 3 banks currently stands at above 50%) and
globally (where the share of the top 3 has doubled over the past 10 years).

At the same time, it is well known that market concentration need not signal a lack of
competitiveness or efficiency within an industry or sector (Wood and Kabiri (2010)). Highly
competitive industries can be concentrated and highly decentralised industries uncompetitive.
A better arbiter of market power may be measures of market contestability, in particular the
potential for barriers to entry to and exit from the market. Entry and exit rates from banking
have, historically, tended to be very modest by comparison with the non-financial sector and
other parts of the financial sector, such as hedge funds.

For banks operating in many markets and offering a range of services, aggregate returns may
offer a misleading guide to the degree of market contestability. Looking separately at the
different activities financial firms undertake provides a potentially clearer indication of the
drivers of performance and the structural factors determining them. In this respect, JP
Morgan Chase provides an interesting case study.

JP Morgan Chase is a large universal bank offering a full package of banking services to
customers, retail and wholesale. Its published accounts also provide a fairly detailed
decomposition of the returns to these different activities. Chart 36 looks at the returns on
equity at JP Morgan Chase, broken down by business line and over time. These estimates are
based on the firm’s economic capital model. So provided this model adequately captures
risk, these estimates ought to risk-adjust returns across the different business lines, allocating
greater amounts of capital to riskier activities.

(a) “Low risk/low return” business activities
19

Consider first some of the activities generally perceived to be low-risk/low return – asset
management and treasury and securities services and retail financial services. All of these
seemingly low risk activities appear to deliver above-average returns on equity, ranging from
a high of around 50% on treasury and asset management services to around 20%+ on retail
financial services.

One potential explanation of these high returns is that the risk associated with these activities,
and hence the capital allocated to them, may be under-estimated by banks’ models. Another
is that the demand for these services is highly price inelastic – for example, because of
information imperfections on the part of end-users of these services. Anecdotally, there is
certainly evidence of a high degree of stickiness in the demand for retail financial services.
Statistically, an adult is more likely to leave their spouse than their bank.

In a UK context, there have been a number of studies by the authorities on the degree of
competition within retail financial services, including by the Competition Commission (2005)
and the Office of Fair Trading (OFT) (2008). The OFT market study found a very low rate of
switching of personal current accounts between banks – fewer than 6% per year. By itself,
however, this low switching rate does not necessarily imply a market failure. For example, it
could be the result of a reputational equilibrium in which money gravitates to banks whose
brand name is recognised and respected.

A more obvious market friction in the UK retail financial services market derives from “free
in credit” banking. In effect, all retail payment services are charged at a zero up-front fee,
except large-value payment transfers through CHAPS6 (which are typically charged at around
£25). This charging schedule is not well aligned with marginal costs. It encourages
bundling of payment services and the charging of latent or hidden fees on other transactions
services – for example, overdraft fees. Explicit charging for retail financial services would
increase transparency and reduce the scope for distortions in the use of these services.

High returns on treasury management services also present something of a puzzle. These
include transactions, information and custodial services to clients. None of these activities
6

CHAPS is the same-day electronic funds transfer system, operated by the bank-owned CHAPS Clearing
Company, that is used for high-value/wholesale payments but also for other time-critical lower value payments
(such as house purchase).

20

are especially expertise-intensive and the market for these services ought in principle to be
contestable internationally.

(b) “High risk/high return” business activities

The higher risk activities associated with finance, such as commercial and investment
banking, do not on the face of it appear to yield as high returns on equity. Nonetheless these
returns, at around 20%, are above levels in the non-financial sector.

Investment banking activities are, in risk terms, a mixed bag. They comprise fairly low-risk
activities, such as (merger and acquisition) M&A advisory work, with higher-risk activities
such as securities underwriting and proprietary trading. To complicate matters, banks’ annual
accounts data do not differentiate simply between these activities – for example, between
market-making and proprietary trading activities in fixed income, currency and commodities
(FICC) and equities. Chart 37 provides a revenue breakdown of US investment banks’
activities.

The lack of a breakdown between client and proprietary sources of revenues is problematic
when making sense of investment banking activities, both in the run-up to and during the
crisis. In the run-up to crisis, FICC and equity-related activity contributed significantly to
revenues, partly on the back of proprietary trading in assets whose prices were rising rapidly.
Some of these gains then dissolved when asset prices, in particular for FICC, went into
reverse during 2008.

The story of 2009/10 is of a strong recovery in FICC and equity revenues. The source of this
revenue recovery is, however, different to the boom. Instead of proprietary risk-taking,
increased revenues appear instead to have been driven by market-making activities on behalf
of clients. These were boosted by a bulge in client activity and wider bid-ask spreads, against
a backdrop of lower levels of competition (Chart 38). It is an open question whether these
returns to market-making will persist.

In some respects, returns to M&A and advisory activities represent even more of a puzzle.
For a start, it is well known that most M&A activity is value-destroying (for example, Palia
(1995)). Advisory fees of 0.5-1.5% are typically taken, even though these activities are
essentially risk-less. And in total under-writing fees are often around 3-4% in Europe and
21

higher still in the US, having risen during the course of the crisis. The level and persistence
of these fees is also something of a puzzle.

One potential explanation is that high fees on underwriting and advisory activities are
sustained as a reputational equilibrium. In effect, clients are willing to pay a premium to
have bonds or equity underwritten by a recognised name, as this is a signal of quality to endinvestors. A similar phenomenon might explain the “2 and 20” fee structure of hedge funds.
The OFT has recently announced an investigation into underwriting fees in the UK market.

Another part of the puzzle was banks’ approach to managing risk across these business lines.
For example, treasury functions are designed to help a firm as a whole manage its balance
sheet, with internal transfer pricing for liquidity services to business lines. By acting in that
way, the risk-taking incentives of each business unit can be aligned with the business as a
whole, thereby complementing firms’ internal risk management.

In practice, during the run-up to crisis, treasury functions were often run as a profit centre.
That would tend to encourage two sets of risk-taking behaviour. First, it may have
encouraged banks to take risks in balance sheet management – for example, by seeking out
cheaper sources of capital (for example, hybrids over pure equity) or liquidity (shorter-term
unsecured borrowing over long-term secured funding). Second, it may have led to the
systematic under-pricing of liquidity services to banks’ business unit, fuelling excessive
growth and/or risk-taking. Tackling these risks would require banks’ treasury operations to
cease being profit centres and to execute effective internal transfer pricing.

6. Conclusion

The financial sector has undergone an astonishing roller-coaster in the course of a decade.
The ascent to heaven and subsequent descent to hell has been every bit as dramatic as in the
1930s. In seeking to smooth next time’s ride, prophylactic public policy has a key role to
play. Of the many initiatives that are underway, this paper has highlighted three which may
warrant further attention in the period head:



First, given its ability to both invigorate and incapacitate large parts of the non-financial
economy, there is a strong case for seeking improved means of measuring the true valueadded by the financial sector. As it is rudimentary to its activities, finding a more
22

sophisticated approach to measuring risk, as well as return, within the financial sector
would seem to be a priority. The conflation of the two can lead to an overstatement of
banks’ contribution to the economy and an understatement of the true risk facing banks
and the economy at large. Better aggregate statistics and bank-specific performance
measures could help better to distinguish miracles and mirages. This might include
developing more sophisticated risk-adjustments to FISIM and a greater focus on banks’
return on assets rather than equity by investors and managers.



Second, because banks are in the risk business it should be no surprise that the run-up to
crisis was hallmarked by imaginative ways of manufacturing this commodity, with a view
to boosting returns to labour and capital. Risk illusion is no accident; it is there by
design. It is in bank managers’ interest to make mirages seem like miracles. Regulatory
measures are being put in place to block off last time’s risk strategies, including through
re-calibrated leverage and capital ratios. But risk migrates to where regulation is weakest,
so there are natural limits to what regulatory strategies can reasonably achieve. At the
height of a boom, both regulators and the regulated are prone to believe in miracles. That
is why the debate about potential structural reform of finance is important - to lessen the
burden on regulation and reverse its descent into ever-greater intrusiveness and
complexity. At the same time, regulators need also to be mindful of risk migrating
outside the perimeter of regulation, where it will almost certainly not be measured.



Third, finance is anything but monolithic. But understanding of these different business
lines is complicated by the absence of reliable data on many of these activities. There are
several open questions about the some of these activities, not least those for which returns
appear to be high. This includes questions about the risks they embody and about the
competitive structure of the markets in which they are traded. These are issues for both
prudential regulators and the competition authorities, working in tandem. If experience
after the Great Depression is any guide, it seems likely that these structural issues will
take centre-stage in the period ahead.

23

References

Akritidis, L (2007), ‘Improving the measurement of banking services in the UK National
Accounts’, Economic and Labour Market Review 1(5), pp. 29-37.

Alessandri, P and Haldane, A G (2009), Banking on the State, available at
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech409.pdf

Bank of England (2009a), ‘The changing composition of the major UK banks’ regulatory
capital’, Bank of England Financial Stability Report, June, pp. 26-27.

Bank of England (2009b), The Role of Macroprudential Policy – A Discussion Paper,
available at
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/other/financialstability/roleofmacroprudentialp
olicy091121.pdf

Berger, A, Herring, R and Szegö, G (1995), The Role of Capital in Financial
Institutions, Journal of Banking and Finance Vol. 19(3-4), pp. 393-430.

Billings, M and Capie, F (2004), ‘Evidence on competition in English commercial
banking, 1920-1970’, Financial History Review Vol.11.

Billings, M and Capie, F (2007), 'Capital in British banking, 1920-1970’, Business History,
Vol. 49(2), pp. 139-162.

Colangelo, A and Inklaar, R (2010), ‘Banking Sector Output Measurement in the Euro Area
– A Modified Approach’, ECB Working Paper Series No. 1204, available at
http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/scpwps/ecbwp1204.pdf

Competition Commission (2005), Store Cards Market Inquiry: Provisional Findings

Report, available at http://www.competitioncommission.org.uk/inquiries/completed/2006/storecard/provisional_findings.htm

24

Feinstein, C H (1972), National Income, Expenditure and Output of the United Kingdom

1855-1965, Cambridge University Press.

Goodhart, C (2010), ‘How should we regulate the financial sector?’, Future of Finance and

the Theory That Underpins It.

Haldane, A G (2009), Small Lessons from a Big Crisis, available at
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech397.pdf

Haldane, A G (2010), The $100 Billion Question, available at
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2010/speech433.pdf

Kay, J (2009), Narrow Banking: The Reform of Banking Regulation, Centre for the Study of
Financial Innovation.

Large, A (2010), Systemic Policy and Financial Stability: A Framework for Delivery, Centre
for the Study of Financial Innovation.

Mink, R (2008), An Enhanced Methodology of Compiling Financial Intermediation Services
Indirectly Measured (FISIM), paper presented at OECD Working Party on National
Accounts, Paris, 14-16 October 2008, available at
http://www.olis.oecd.org/olis/2008doc.nsf/LinkTo/NT000059AE/$FILE/JT03251258.PDF

Mitchell, B R (1988), British Historical Statistics, Cambridge University Press.

Office of Fair Trading (2008), Personal Current Accounts in the UK – An OFT Market

Study, available at http://www.oft.gov.uk/shared_oft/reports/financial_products/OFT1005.pdf

O’Mahony, M and Marcel P T (2009), ‘Output, Input and Productivity Measures at the
Industry Level: the EU KLEMS Database’, Economic Journal 119(538), pp. 374-403.

Oulton, N and Srinivasan, S (2005), ‘Productivity growth in UK industries, 1970-2000:
structural change and the role of ICT’, Bank of England Working Paper Series No. 259.
25

Philippon, T (2008), ‘The Evolution of the US Financial Industry from 1860 to 2007:
Theory and Evidence’, available at http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~tphilipp/papers/finsize.pdf.

Philippon, T and Reshef, A (2009), ‘Wages and Human Capital in the U.S. Financial
Industry: 1909-2006’, NBER Working Paper Series No. 14644.

Reinhart, C M and Rogoff, K (2009), This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial

Folly, Princeton University Press.

Schularick M and Taylor A M (2009), ‘Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy,
Leverage Cycles and Financial Crises, 1870–2008’, NBER Working Paper Series No. 15512.

Sheppard, D K (1971), The Growth and Role of U.K. Financial Institutions 1880-

1962, Methuen.

Solow, R M (1957), ‘Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function’, Review of

Economics and Statistics 39(3), pp. 312-320.

Wadhwani, S (2010), ‘What mix of monetary policy and regulation is best for stabilising the
economy?’, Future of Finance and the Theory That Underpins It.

Wang, J C (2003), ‘Loanable Funds, Risk, and Bank Service Output’, Federal Reserve Bank

of Boston Working Paper Series No. 03‐4.

Wang, J C, Basu, A and Fernald J G (2004), A General-Equilibrium Asset-Pricing

Approach to the Measurement of Nominal and Real Bank Output, Invited for conference
volume on Price Index Concepts and Measurement, Conference on Research on Income and
Wealth (CRIW), available at http://www.bos.frb.org/economic/wp/wp2004/wp047.htm

Wood, G and Kabiri, A (2010), Firm Stability and System Stability: The Regulatory

Delusion, Paper prepared for a conference on Managing Systemic Risk at the University of
Warwick 7th-9th April 2010.

26

ANNEX1
Table 1 Average annual growth rate of UK
financial intermediation

Chart 1 UK financial intermediation
and aggregrate real GVA
Financial Intermediation

GVA: Financial
GVA: Aggregate intermediation Difference (pp)
1856-1913
2.0
7.6
5.6

1975=100
400

Aggregate

350
300
250
200

1914-1970

1.9

1.5

-0.4

1971-2008

2.4

3.8

1.4

1856-2008

2.1

4.4

2.3

S o urc e s : F e ins te in (1972), M itc he ll (1988), ONS a nd B a nk c a lc ula tio ns .

150
100
50
0
1855 1875 1895 1915 1935 1955 1975 1995
Sources: Feinstein (1972), Mitchell (1988), ONS and Bank
calculations.

Chart 2 Gross operating surplus of
UK private financial corporations (%
of total)

Chart 3 Share of the financial
industry in US GDP
Per cent

Per cent
18

9

16

8

14

7

12

6

10

5

8

4

6

3

4
2
0
2
4
1948
48

58

68

78

88

98

2

+

1

-

0
1850
50
70

90

1910
10
30

50

70

90

2008
08
Source: P hilippon (2008).

Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.

1
Some of the charts in this appendix refer to the LCFIs (large complex financial institutions) and Major UK banks peer groups. Membership of
the major UK banks group is based on the provision of customer services in the United Kingdom, regardless of the country of ownership. The
following financial groups, in alphabetical order, are currently members: Banco Santander, Bank of Ireland, Barclays, Britannia, Co-operative
Financial Services, HSBC, Lloyds Banking Group, National Australia Bank, Nationwide, Northern Rock and RBS. The LCFIs include the
world’s largest banks that carry out a diverse and complex range of activities in major financial centres. The group is identified currently as:
Bank of America, Barclays, BNP Paribas, Citigroup, Credit Suisse, Deutsche Bank, Goldman Sachs, HSBC, JPMorgan Chase & Co., Morgan
Stanley, RBS, Société Générale and UBS. Membership of both peer groups changes over time and these changes are reflected in the charts.

Chart 5 Average cumulative total
returns of UK, US and euro area
financials(a)(b)

Chart 4 Pre-tax profits of the world's
1000 largest banks
$ billions

Cumulative return (per cent)

LCFIs
Banks excl. LCFIs
Insurers
Hedge Funds

900
800
700

200
150

600
500

100

400
300

50

200
100

+
0

09/10

08/09

07/08

06/07

05/06

04/05

03/04

02/03

01/02

00/01

0

00

01

02

03

04

05

06

07

08

-

09

50

Source: www.TheBankerDatabase.com.

Sources: Bloomberg, CreditSuisse/Tremont and Bank calculations.
(a) Market capitalisation-weighted average.
(b) Based on Sample based on banks and insurers in S&P 500, FTSE
All Share and DJ EuroSTOXX indices as of March 2009. Excludes
firms for which returns not quoted over entire sample period.

Chart 6 Cumulative excess returns
from hedged bet in UK equities placed
in 1900(a)

Chart 7 Value of gross output of the
UK banking sector
£ billions

Other operating income

40

Net Spread Earnings

Per cent
12,000

35

Fees and commissions
FISIM

30

10,000

25

8,000

20

6,000

15

4,000

10

2,000

5
0

0

04

-2,000

05

06

Source: Bank of England.

1900 1917 1933 1950 1967 1983 2000
Sources: Global Financial Data and Bank calculations.
(a) Strategy is long £100 of UK financial equitites and short £100 of
UK broad equity index established at the start of 1900 and held.

2

07

08

09

Table 2 Current and risk-adjusted FISIM estimates if risk is priced correctly
Current FISIM:

borrower rate – risk-free rate

Risk-adjusted
FISIM:

borrower rate – market rate of risk (A)

= (7% - 5%) * £100 = £2
= [7% - (5% +1%)] * £100 = £1

Table 3 Current and risk-adjusted FISIM estimates if risk is priced incorrectly
Current FISIM:

borrower rate – risk-free rate

= (7% - 5%) * £100 = £2

“Measured” riskadjusted FISIM:

borrower rate – market rate of risk (A)

“True” riskadjusted FISIM:

borrower rate – market rate of risk (BB) = [7% - (5% +2%)] * £100 = £0

= [7% - (5% +1%)] * £100 = £1

Chart 9 UK financial sector physical
capital (share of total industry
capital)(a)

Chart 8 Share of financial
intermediation employment in UK
and US whole-economy employment

Per cent

Per cent
5

14
12
10

4

8

3
6
United States (a)

2

4

1

2

United Kingdom (b)

0

0
48
1948

58

68

78

88

98

70 73 76 79 82 85 88 91 94 97 00 03

08
2008

Source: Bank of England Dataset (2003). See Oulton and Srinivasan
(2005).

Sources: ONS, Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bank calcualtions.

(a) Annual data for 34 industries across UK economy. Capital
includes buildings, equipment, vehicles, intangibles, computers,
software and communication equipment.

(a) Full-time and part-time employees in finace and insurance as a
per cent of total.
(b) Employee jobs in financial intermediation as a per cent of total.

3

Chart 10 Annual TFP growth across
the five largest UK industries, average
2000-7(a)(b)

Chart 11 Differential in TFP growth
between financial intermediation and
the whole economy(a)(b)
P

Real estate, renting, etc (c)

(22%)

Per cent
10

1995-2007

8

2003-2007

Manufacturing (12%)

6
4

Wholesale / retail trade (11%)

2
Financial intermediation (8%)

0

3

Sources: EU KLEMS and Bank calculations. See O’Mahony and
Timmer (2009).

Austria

US

France

Japan

UK

(a) TFP estimated using a value-added rather than gross-output based
approach. Estimates account for changes in both the quantity and
quality of labour .
(b) A positive number implies higher TFP growth in financial
intermediation relative to the whole economy.

Chart 13 Average weekly earnings
across UK industries, 2007

Chart 12 Returns to labour and
capital in UK financial
intermediation(a)(b)
Compensaion of employees

£ per week
1000

£ billions, current prices

800

140

Gross value added

-

Sources: EU KLEMS and Bank calculations. See O’Mahony and
Timmer (2009).

(a) Numbers in parentheses denote share of industry GVA in total
GVA in 2007.
(a) TFP estimated using a value-added rather than gross-output
based approach. Estimates account for changes in both the quantity
and quality of labour .
(c) Real estate, renting and business activities.

Gross operating surplus

Italy

Per cent

Sweden

2

Germany

1
+

Netherlands

0
-

Australia

1

Belgium

Spain

Health and social work (7%)

Ireland

2

+

600
120

400

100

200

92

97

02
2002

07

Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Data refer to financial corporations.
(b) The implied split between labour and capital is only approximate.
Compensation of employees underestimates total returns to labour as
it excludes income of the self-employed (which is measured as part
of gross operationg surplus).

4

Electricity, gas and water supply.
Transport, storage and communication.
Real estate, renting and business activities.
Distribtution, hotels and restaurants.
Agriculture, forestry and fishing.

Agriculture, etc (e)

Education

Distribution, etc (d)

Other services

Manufacturing

Real estate, etc (c)

Public administration

Health and social work

0
1987
87

Transport, etc (b)

20

Construction

40

Utilities (a)

Finance

60

Mining and quarrying

0

80

Chart 14 Ratio of financial
intermediation to economy-wide
earnings versus leverage of the UK
banking sector
Ratio

Chart 15 Historical 'excess' wage in
the US financial sector(a)
'Excess' wage
0.5

Ratio

25

0.4

2.5

Earnings differential (RHS)

0.3

Leverage (LHS) (a)

20

0.2

2.0

0.1

15

+
0.0

10
1.5

0.1

5

1910
10

0

1.0
00

02

04

06

-

25

40

55

70

85

2000
00

Source: Philippon and Reshef (2009).

08

(a) Difference between the actual relative wage in finance and an
estimated benchmark series for the relative wage.

Sources: ONS, Bank of England and Bank calculations.
(a) Leverage of the UK-resident banking system defined as total
assets over capital and other internal funds. 1-year rolling average.

Chart 17 Return on equity in UK
finance(a)

Chart 16 Net operating surplus over
net capital stock in UK financial
intermediation and the whole
economy(a)

Per cent
35

μ = 20.4
σ = 6.9

30

Return
25

70

20

60

μ = 7.0
σ = 2.0

Whole economy

50

Financial Corporations

15
10

40

5

30

0

20

1921

10

58

68

78

88

98

1961

1981

2001

Sources: BBA, Capie and Billings (2004) and Bank calculations.
(a) There is a definitional change in the sample in 1967. The latter
period has a slightly larger number of banks and returns on equity are
calculated somewhat differently, including pre-tax.

0
48
1948

1941

08
2008

Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Gross operating surplus less capital consumption , divided by net
capital stock.

5

Chart 18 Major UK banks' and LCFIs'
return on common equity

Chart 19 Size of the UK banking
system(a)
Banking sector assets (per cent of GDP)

Per cent

600

40
20

-

0

500

+
‐

400

20

Major UK banks
US securities houses
US commercial banks
European LCFIs

300

40
60

200

80

100

100
120
00

01

02

03

04

05

06

07

08

0

09

80
1880 98
98

16
1916

34

52

70

88

2006
6

Sources: Sheppard (1971) and Bank of England.

Sources: Capital IQ and Bank calculations.

(a) The definition of UK banking sector assets used in the series is
broader after 1966, but using a narrower definition
throughout gives the same growth profile.

Chart 21 Total assets of the world's
1000 largest banks

Chart 20 Size of the US banking
system relative to GDP, 1870-2008
Per cent

$ trillions

120

120

100

100

80

80
60

60

40

40
20

20

Source: www.TheBankerDatabase.com.

Source: Schularick and Taylor (2009).

6

09/10

2008

08/09

90

07/08

70

06/07

50

05/06

30

04/05

1910
10

03/04

90

02/03

0
1870
70

01/02

00/01

0

Chart 22 Largest companies' assets in
each sector relative to annual GDP in
the UK
Per cent

Chart 23 Long-run capital ratios for
UK and US banks

140

2007

(c)

United
States (a)

120

Per cent
25
(d)
20

100

2000

80

15

60
40

10

United
Kingdom (b)

20

5

0

0
1880

1940

1960

1980

2000

(a) US data show equity as a percentage of assets (ratio of aggregate
dollar value of bank book equity to aggregate dollar value of bank book
assets).
(b) UK data on the capital ratio show equity and reserves over total assets
on a time-varying sample of banks, representing the majority of the UK
banking system, in terms of assets. Prior to 1970 published accounts
understated the true level of banks' capital because they did not include
hidden reserves. The solid line adjusts for this. 2009 observation is from
H1.
(c) Change in UK accounting standards.
(d) International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) were adopted for
the end-2005 accounts. The end-2004 accounts were also restated on an
IFRS basis. The switch from UK GAAP to IFRS reduced the capital ratio
of the UK banks in the sample by approximately 1 percentage point in
2004.

Chart 24 Leverage at the LCFIs(a)

US commerical banks

1920

Sources: US: Berger, Herring, and Szegö (1995). UK: Sheppard (1971),
Billings and Capie (2007), BBA, published accounts and Bank
calculations.

Sources: Capital IQ, International Monetary Fund and Bank
calculations.

US securities houses

1900

Ratio
50

European LCFIs

45

Major UK banks

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10
Sources: Bloomberg, published accounts and Bank calculations.
(a) Leverage equals assets over total shareholders equity net of
minority interests.

7

Chart 25 Major UK banks' and LCFIs'
leverage ratios(a)(b)
Maximum-minimum range
US LCFIs

European
LCFIs

Chart 26 Major UK banks' pre-tax
return on equity(a)

Median
Major UK
banks (c)

Gearing
Pre-tax return on equity
Dec 2002 = 100
Pre-tax return on assets
Pre-tax pre-provision return on assets

Ratio
120

200
150

100
80

100

60

50
+
0
-

40
20

50

0
2007 08

09 2007 08

09 2007 08

100

09

H2 H2 H1 H2 H1 H2 H1 H2 H1 H2 H1 H2 H1 H2
09
08
05
06
07
02 03 04

Sources: Published accounts and Bank calculations.

Sources: Published accounts and Bank calculations.
(a) Based on twelve-month trailing pre-tax revenues and average
shareholders equity.

(a) Assets adjusted on a best-efforts basis to achieve comparability
between institutions reporting under US GAAP and IFRS. Derivatives
netted in line with US GAAP rules. Off-balance sheet vehicles included
in line with IFRS rules.
(b) Assets adjusted for cash items, deferred tax assets, goodwill and
intangibles. For some firms, changes in exchange rates have impacted
foreign currency assets, but this cannot be adjusted for. Capital excludes
Tier 2 instruments, preference shares, hybrids, goodwill and intangibles.
(c) Excludes Northern Rock.

Chart 28 LCFIs' ratios of total assets to
Tier 1 capital and risk-weighted assets
to total assets(a)

Chart 27 Major UK banks’ ratios of
total assets to Tier 1 capital and riskweighted assets to total assets, 19972008(a)(b)

Total assets/Tier 1 capital
80

Total Assets/Tier 1 capital
80

US leverage ratio limit (b)
US LCFIs end-Jun 2009
European LCFIs end-Jun 2009
US LCFIs end-2007 (c)
European LCFIs end-2007

70
2005-2008

60

2001-2004

50

1997-2000

60
50
40

40

30

30

20

20
Tier 1 capital ratio of 8%

70

Tier 1 capital ratio of 8%

10

10
0

0

0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
RWA/Total assets

0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
RWA/Total Assets

Sources: Published accounts and Bank calculations.

Sources: Published accounts and Bank calculations.

(a) Assets adjusted for cash and cash items in the course of collection
from banks and deferred tax assets. Assets adjusted on best-efforts basis
to ensure comparability between institutions reporting under US GAAP
and IFRS. Derivatives are netted in ine with US GAAP rules. Off
balance sheet vehicles are included in line with IFRS rules (excluding
mortgages sold to US government-sponsored entities).
(b) US leverage ratio approximated using a ratio of Tier 1 capital to total
assets of 4%. The inclusion of qualifying off-balance sheet assets places
some US LCFIs above the leverage ratio proxy.
(c) Excludes US securities houses.

(a) See footnote (4) for definition of Tier 1 capital.
(b) Tier 1 capital ratio equals Tier 1 capital over risk-weighed assets.

8

(a)

Table 4 Summary of component factors of decomposition of LCFIs' ROE
Financial leverage

Unit-risk

Write downs

2007

Change 2007/04
%

2007

Change 2007/04
%

End-Q1 2010
(USD bn)

as % of common
equity

Citi

24.5

22.9

0.6

0.0

58.0

51.1

Bank of America

20.6

19.1

0.7

-1.1

20.6

14.5

JPM

17.6

4.4

0.7

-1.5

13.6

11.0

Barclays

37.8

36.4

0.3

-26.0

22.9

56.6

RBS

31.2

22.1

0.4

-21.2

26.5

32.6

HSBC

21.3

11.8

0.5

-15.1

9.4

7.3

UBS

58.1

16.6

0.2

12.5

50.8

163.9

Deutsche Bank

52.1

15.7

0.2

-13.6

15.6

28.7

SocGen

43.2

49.9

0.3

-14.0

7.8

20.3

BNP Paribas

39.7

18.2

0.4

-3.0

4.6

5.9

Credit Suisse

39.2

-11.6

0.2

25.4

13.8

35.6

Merrill Lynch

35.3

-

0.4

-

58.6

212.6

Morgan Stanley

27.8

-

0.3

-

20.7

68.6

Lehman Brothers

27.6

-

0.3

-

16.3

76.2

Goldman Sachs

25.0

-

0.4

-

10.3

25.8

Sources: Published accounts and Bank calculations.
(a) Ratios are as at end-year, except for the US securities houses, which are as at end-Q2 2008, and are adjusted for derivatives netting consistent with US
GAAP where possible.

(a)

Table 5 LCFIs' common equity margin
2007

Change 2007/04 %

Citi

0.8

14.3

Bank of America

0.6

-8.9

JPM

0.7

10.5

Barclays

1.1

9.4

RBS

1.0

48.3

HSBC

0.8

4.1

UBS

1.0

7.7

Deutsche Bank

0.7

3.8

SocGen

0.8

-20.4

BNP Paribas

0.7

-13.8

Credit Suisse

0.8

18.6

Source: Published accounts.

9

Chart 30 LCFIs' ratios of total assets to
Tier 1 capital and trading assets to total
assets (a)(b)

Chart 29 LCFIs' trading assets and
loans to customers as a proportion of
total assets(a)

T otal assets/Tier 1 capital 80

Per cent
50

70
UBS

45
Total loans to customers as a
proportion of total assets

Deutsche Bank

40

RBS
BNP
Paribas

35

Citigroup

30

Total trading assets as a
proportion of total assets
01

02

03

04

05

06

07

40

Societe Generale

30

JPMorgan

20

HSBC

10

20

0
0.0

15
00

50
Credit Suisse
Barclays

Bank of America

25

08

60

09

0.1

0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
T rading assets/Total assets

0.7

0.8

Sources: Published accounts and Bank calculations.

Sources: P ublished accounts and Bank calculations.

(a) Incluides US commercial bank LCFIs, European LCFIs and UK
LCFIs.

(a) Assets adjusted for cash and cash items in the course of collection
from banks and deferred tax assets. Assets adjusted on best-efforts basis
to ensure comparability between institutions reporting under US GAAP
and IFRS. Derivatives are netted in ine with US GAAP rules. Off
balance sheet vehicles are included in line with IFRS rules (excluding
mortgages sold to US government-sponsored entities).
(b) Data as at end-2007.

Chart 32 Global issuance of asset-backed
securities (a)(b)

Chart 31 Major UK banks' and LCFIs'
write-downs(a)

Mar.2000 = 1
40

US$ billions

H2 07
H1 08
H2 08
H1 09
H2 09

H2 07
H1 08
H2 08
H1 09
H2 09

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10+
010

H2 07
H1 08
H2 08
H1 09
H2 09

Other (b)
Credit valuation adjustments(c)
Leveraged loans
Commercial mortgage-backed securities
Residential mortgage-backed securities

US LCFIs

European
LCFIs

Major UK
banks

35
30

Other ABS
CMBS
RMBS
Moore's Law (LHS)

US$ billions
1000

700
600

20

500

15

400
300
200

5

100
0

0
00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10
Source: Dealogic.
(a) 'Other ABS' includes auto, credit card and student loan ABS.
(b) Bars show publicly-placed issuance.

10

800

25

10

Sources: Published accounts and Bank calculations.
(a) Includes write-downs due to mark-to-market adjustments on trading
book positions where details are disclosed by firms.
(b) Other includes SIVs and other ABS write downs.
(c) On exposures to monolines and others.

900

Chart 34 Growth of outstanding
notional amount of CDS vs. Moore's
Law

Chart 33 Global structured finance
ratings changes(a)
Per cent

50

Dec 2004 = 1
6.0

Upgrades
Downgrades

40

5.0

US$ trillions
70

Outstanding amount of CDS (rhs)
Moore's Law (lhs)

50

4.0

30

60

40
3.0

20

30
2.0

10

1.0

93

95

97

99

01

03

05

10
0

0.0

0
91

20

Dec.04 Dec.05 Dec.06 Dec.07 Dec.08 Dec.09

07

Sources: Bank for International Settlements and Bank calculations.

Source: Fitch Ratings.
(a) Data compares beginning-of-the-year rating with end-of-the-year
rating. Does not count multiple rating actions throughout the year.

Chart 35 Concentration of US banks,
1935-2008(a)
Per cent

45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

1935
35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 00 05
Sources: FDIC and Bank calculations.
(a) Top 3 banks by total assets, as percentage of total banking sector
assets. Data include only insured depository subsidiaries of banks.

11

Chart 36 JP Morgan Chase business segment return on equity, quarterly Q4 2005 – Q1
2010
Per cent
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
10
Q4 05 to Q1 10

Q4 05 to Q1 10

Q4 05 to Q1 10

Q4 05 to Q1 10

Q4 05 to Q1 10

Q4 05 to Q1 10

Q4 05 to Q1 10

+
-

20
30
40

Total

Investment bank

Retail financial
services

Card services

Commercial
banking

Treasury and Asset management
securities services

Source: Pubilshed accounts.

Chart 37 Decomposition of US LCFIs'
investment banking revenues
One-off items
Other (a)
Advisory
Debt and equities underwriting
Equities trading
FICC trading (b)
Total
Total before one-offs (c)

Chart 38 Bid-ask spreads on selected
assets (a)(b)(c)

US$ billions
180

Corporate bonds
Government bonds
Equities
Commodities
Currencies
Interest rate swaps

160
140
120
100

Indices: January 2005 = 100
1200
1000
800

80
600

60
40

400

20 +
0

200

-

20
40
04

05

06

07

08

09

0

(d)

2005

Sources: Published accounts and Bank calculations.
(a) Refers to other activties wihthin IB business segment, including
prime brokerage and securities services.
(b) FICC includes fixed income, currency and commodities.
(c) Adjusted for write-downs and changes in fair value on FICC and
equities trading revenues.
(d) Revenues adjusted to reflect change in reporting cycle for US
securities houses.

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Sources: Bloomberg, UBS Delta and Bank calculations.
(a) Monthly moving averages of daily bid-ask spreads.
(b) iBoxx € Corporates for corporate bonds; S&P 500 for equities; iBoxx
€ Sovereigns for
government bonds; sterling-dollar exchange rate for currencies; gold
price for commodities;
and euro five-year swaps for interest rate swaps.
(c) Data to close of business on 14 June 2010.

12

