The Impact of the Financial Market Disruption on the UK
Economy
Speech given by
Sir John Gieve, Deputy Governor, Bank of England

17 January 2008

1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Introduction
These are testing times for the MPC.
The latest official figures for growth confirm the strength of the economy in Q3 with
above trend growth in domestic demand and a growing current account deficit. But
the evidence from surveys and other timely indicators is that growth is slowing quite
sharply now, in part because of the rises in interest rates last year. That in itself might
justify a progressive shift in policy – from restrictive to a more neutral stance. And
the case for easing has been greatly strengthened by the disruption in global credit
markets and in our own banking system which brings a risk of a deeper downturn.
However we have also seen a big rise in the world prices of oil and food. That is
being amplified in the UK by a fall in sterling and is now coming through in our food,
petrol, gas and electricity prices. These are likely to raise our inflation rate well above
target in the coming months at a time when short term inflation expectations remain
uncomfortably high.
This combination of upside and downside risks complicates our task of keeping
inflation on track to meet the 2% target.
Financial market disruption
The disruption of credit and money markets was set off by a deterioration in the US
sub-prime housing market. This started to show up in increasing provisions in the
2006 accounts of banks which held them on balance sheet in a traditional way. But
impairment charges of that sort would not have occasioned such ferment in
international markets. That was the result of the impact on the new markets for
structured credit such as Collateralised Debt Obligations (CDO’s)1 (Chart 1), which
had developed to meet investors’ demand for higher yield. As forecasts of US subprime defaults mounted, it became clear that such products had introduced opacity
and uncertainty into both the distribution and scale of losses.

1

Collateralised Debt Obligations are securities backed by a portfolio of fixed-income assets that
are issued in tranches of varying seniority. As default losses accrue to the underlying portfolio they are
applied to the securities in reverse order of seniority. The main types of CDOs are those based on
portfolios of leveraged bank loans (CLOs) and asset-backed securities (ABS CDOs).

2

The crisis played itself out in number of “lurches”, which were reflected in the
movements in the ABX indices2 (Chart 2):
•

Although the problems of the sub-prime market were obvious in mid2006, it wasn’t until January/February 2007 that the rising defaults led
to mark downs in indices valuing the riskier tranches of the structured
products and difficulties at a number of US sub-prime originators;

•

in June, as losses began to appear in highly-rated tranches of so-called
mezzanine CDOs, two heavily exposed Bear Stearns hedge funds
collapsed; the rating agencies began to review their methodologies and
started to downgrade securities, some by several notches;

•

at the end of July, a SIV3 sponsored by IKB reported losses on subprime mortgage exposures and failed to raise funding in the
commercial paper market, and in early August BNP Paribas
temporarily suspended redemptions from a number of money market
funds because of valuation problems; this provoked an ‘investors’
strike’ on mortgage-backed securities and the commercial paper that
funded off-balance sheet vehicles holding them; in turn this led banks
to hoard liquidity against potential calls on their committed lines, to a
marked tightening of inter-bank markets and funding pressures on
banks, including, of course, Northern Rock;

•

after a brief lull in October, renewed doubts about the scale of the
losses in the big international banks led to concerns about counterparty
risk and sparked a renewed squeeze in the money markets with LIBOR
spreads climbing back to levels experienced in August.

There are many lessons for markets and the authorities from this turmoil. First it
underlined the critical importance of liquidity in managing and regulating banks.
Second it showed up the limitations of the models which underpin the valuation and
rating of structured products and the excessive weight that had been given to them not
just by the naive or unwary, but by some of the most sophisticated players in financial
2

The ABX indices are baskets of 20 credit default swaps that provide insurance against default losses
on securities of a given rating and vintage of issuance that are backed by home equity loans. The home
equity loan category comprises mainly of sub-prime first mortgages, but also second
mortgages, mortgages with high loan-to-value ratios and home equity lines of credit

3

Structured investment vehicles are funds that issue short-term securities in order to invest in longerterm securities. The latter have typically comprised mainly of mortgage-backed securities and other
asset-backed securities. Banks sponsored SIVs are managed by banks.

3

markets (including many of the sponsoring banks who underestimated the risks they
were running in retaining super senior tranches). Third, it illuminated the adverse
incentives that had been allowed to develop in the distribution chain for credit
products including the strong incentives for originators to put quantity above quality,
for the rating agencies to expand their scope as widely as possible, and for banks to
use off-balance-sheet vehicles to finance structured credits. It may also reveal some
flaws in the compensation schemes in banks. In some cases these incentives arose
despite regulation, in others they were the consequence of faults in the regulatory
system. Finally it showed again how measures of risk used by companies and
regulators can be pro-cyclical, encouraging more risk taking at the top of the cycle
and potentially exacerbating the downswing.
In the last few weeks, markets have been calmer. Liquidity pressures in short-term
funding markets have eased, helped in part by the co-ordinated action by central
banks to address elevated funding rates over the year end (Chart 3). And, as losses
have been declared it has proved possible for a number of firms such as UBS, Merrill
Lynch and Citigroup to attract new capital including from Sovereign Wealth Funds.
It is too early to declare the problem solved. The longer term bank funding markets
remain relatively illiquid, many securitisation markets remain effectively closed
(Chart 4), and general market sentiment remains fragile. Only a part of the total losses
on sub-prime have yet been declared and not all the questions about the future of SIVs
or the capitalisation of monoline insurers have yet been answered. The sub-prime
chapter will not be closed for some months yet and there are still risks of re-ignition
of the acute money market conditions we saw last month.
But there are grounds for hope that we are reaching the end of the beginning at least
and that the key challenge is moving from stabilising the financial markets themselves
to dealing with the impact on the wider economy.
Macroeconomic impact
Judging that impact is not easy. Banking crises have typically reflected
macroeconomic difficulties at home. Banks have lent too much and too cheaply at the
top of the cycle and have then suffered from defaults when policy tightened and
unemployment and failures increased. The most recent example in the UK banking
sector was during the recession of the early 1990s when the major banks wrote off
about 2.5%of their domestic loan book and tightened credit conditions, thus
exacerbating the fall in property prices and in confidence. It has been estimated that
4

the effect of the tightening of credit conditions was to reduce UK output in 1991 by
almost 2% relative to what it would otherwise have been.4 Of course, there was little
monetary policy could do at that time to offset these effects because of Sterling’s
ERM membership.
But the current crisis does not follow that pattern. It has come at a time when the
performance of the UK economy has been unusually good. Over the past fifteen years
the economy has experienced the most stable macroeconomic conditions on record
with steady growth, low inflation and a declining trend in unemployment.5 For the
most part the underlying balance sheet position of households and firms is robust and
most indicators of financial fragility such as mortgage arrears, repossessions and
corporate insolvencies are at low levels (Chart 5).
So the question is whether we can reverse into macroeconomic trouble starting from a
banking crisis with its origins in the US housing market. Of course a marked
slowdown in the US will diminish directly part of our exports. But two domestic
transmission channels to consumption and investment will determine the size of the
overall impact on our economy:
•

the effects of credit constraints; and

•

impact on expectations and confidence.

Credit constraints
With their own funding rates increasing and a reduction in their ability to distribute
risk through securitisation, there is now clear evidence that UK lenders have begun to
tighten lending conditions for households and firms. The Bank’s Credit Conditions
Survey (CCS) of major UK lenders has identified a change in behaviour since the
summer.6 Contrary to earlier expectations, lenders reported that the availability of
secured credit to households had reduced noticeably over the three months to midDecember (Chart 6). Corporate credit availability was also reported to have been
reduced significantly over the same period. A further reduction in the general
availability of credit was expected over the next three months.

4

Young, G (1996), ‘The influence of financial intermediaries on the behaviour of the UK economy’,
NIESR Occasional Paper No 50.
5

This is discussed in detail in the Bank’s memorandum to the House of Commons Treasury
Committee’s inquiry into ‘The Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of England: ten years on’,
Quarterly Bulletin, 47(1), 2007Q1, 24- 38.
6

Credit Conditions Survey, http://externalboeweb/publications/other/monetary/creditconditions.htm

5

The survey suggests that lenders are both raising the price of borrowing and reducing
the range of people and firms they are prepared to lend to. There has been a pick up
in the average spread of quoted mortgage rates over the appropriate funding rate in
recent months (Chart 7). There has also been a fall in the number of mortgage
products available for credit-impaired borrowers (Chart 8).
The first impact of the tightening in secured credit conditions is being felt in the
property markets and lower demand for assets but there will also be direct effects on
activity. Although only a minority of households may be credit constrained they are
probably sufficient in number to depress household spending somewhat, possibly
reversing a little of the decline in the saving ratio seen since the early 1990s (Chart 9).
In a similar way a tightening of corporate lending conditions will affect some
companies’ investment. The Deloitte CFO survey taken in early December finds that
20% of firms expect the recent credit market events to have a negative impact on their
capital spending in 2008.7
This tightening of credit conditions would be exacerbated by any further weakening in
the financial position of banks due to a slowdown in the wider economy. Slower
growth and a rise in unemployment in particular would lead to higher loan defaults.
There are signs that this is already happening in consumer lending in the US.
Weakening property prices would reduce the amount that lenders could realise in the
event of default. With pressures on their capital and new capital expensive where it is
available, banks are likely to attempt to increase their margins and to slow down new
lending, thereby reducing their capital requirements, for example by tightening nonprice terms and conditions on new loans.

One factor which regulators are watching carefully at present is the impact of the shift
this month to the Basle II system of capital requirements for European banks. While
Basle II improves on its predecessor and removes many undesirable incentives, it
retains some procyclical features and any transition needs to be managed carefully.8

7

The Deloitte CFO Survey: Benchmarking Corporate Financial Attitudes, 4 January 2008.

8

Benford, J and Nier, E (2007), 'Monitoring cyclicality of Basel II Capital Requirements', Financial
Stability Paper No. 3 (December 2007), Bank of England.

6

The impact on expectations and confidence
The other channel by which the financial market turbulence is likely to have
macroeconomic effects is by prompting more cautious behaviour by households and
firms. This might simply reflect uncertainty about the future. Firms may temporarily
postpone investment because of greater uncertainty about the future path of demand.
We saw an effect like this after 9/11 for example. But it might also reflect a revision
by households and firms about the sustainable path of income and wealth in the
coming years. The change in expectations may reflect the higher costs of borrowing
and a higher risk of unemployment.

Again a reduction in confidence about future growth may lead directly to lower
consumption and investment. It is also likely to affect equity and property markets.
Potential buyers may decide to wait before purchasing if they sense that there is a
chance that prices may fall. Such behaviour can be self-fulfilling.

There is no doubt that the housing market has been weakening significantly in recent
months and the trend is more advanced still in commercial property markets where
prices are falling rapidly. It is widely assumed that weakening property prices will
also depress consumption. The Bank has tended to be sceptical of this mechanism. 9
While property prices and spending tend to move together, that doesn’t prove that one
causes the other. Both may result from changes in income and expectations of future
income.10 Indeed, in the same way as you can’t have your cake and eat it, it is not
clear that a general increase in house prices does create extra spending power for the
population as a whole. Owners who expect to remain in their current house for a long
time cannot also spend their housing wealth and the benefits to those trading down are
broadly offset by the costs to those trading up. While older owners may be richer and
believe they can support a more expensive lifestyle, the rise in prices will show
through in higher rents and larger deposits for those wanting to get on the ladder.

9

This view is discussed fully in Benito, A, Thompson, J, Waldron, M, and Wood, R (2006), ‘House
prices and consumer spending’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Summer, pp. 142-154.
10

Some household level evidence for this view is given by Attanasio, O, Blow, L, Hamilton, R, and
Leicester, A (2005), 'Consumption, house prices and expectation', Bank of England Working Paper No.
271

7

But even if there is not a strong causal connection between house prices and
consumption through a wealth channel, there may nevertheless be a significant
collateral channel. When house prices fall, the amount of housing equity and hence
collateral at homeowners’ disposal decreases. This will tend to delay spending as
lenders are willing to lend less or lend on less favourable terms to those who have
little or no housing equity. That channel should have become less important in recent
years. This is because most homeowners have substantial equity in their homes which
would not be materially affected by relatively modest changes in house prices.11 This
may help to account for a decline in the correlation between real house price growth
and consumption since the beginning of the decade (Chart 10).

An analogous collateral channel may operate in the corporate sector. Declines in
commercial property prices will weaken corporate balance sheets and this could affect
corporate spending if lenders raise the cost of borrowing to affected companies. This
effect is likely to be particularly pronounced among commercial real estate
companies.
Inflation and energy prices

In these ways the losses in credit markets are already contributing to slowing growth;
the questions are by how much and for how long? The danger that they could turn a
necessary modest slowdown into a deeper and more painful downturn is clear and, of
course, that would dampen inflationary pressures. That was a key factor in my
decision to vote for a cut in rates in November and December.

But the current situation is complicated by emerging upside pressures on prices. This
inflationary pressure is coming largely from outside the UK, reflecting in part
increased demand from countries like China where output growth has been both rapid
and commodity intensive. That has led to renewed strength in commodity prices
(Chart 11), with oil rising as high as $100 a barrel and some agricultural foods
reaching record highs in dollar terms. This has already increased the prices of

11

Evidence on housing equity is presented in Waldron, M and Young, Y (2006), ‘Household debt and
spending: results from the 2007 NMG Research survey’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Winter,
pp. 512-21.

8

imported goods, and that effect has been amplified recently by the fall in sterling. In
turn, it is putting upward pressure on the sterling prices set by domestic producers for
crude oil and wholesale gas and electricity. And, in contrast to the past, demand from
emerging economies may mean that commodity prices prove resilient to slowing
growth in the industrialised economies.

The appropriate monetary policy reaction to upside pressures on prices coming from
outside the economy (such as an energy price shock) depends on how households and
businesses react to that shock - in other words, on so-called ‘second-round’ effects. A
key determinant of those effects will be the impact on inflation expectations. If
households’ and businesses’ expectations of future inflation rise following the initial
price shock, pressures for compensating rises in wages and prices are much more
likely. Inflation expectations are difficult to measure, but surveys of households’
expectations have picked up since early 2005 (Chart 12). This partly reflects the rise
in inflation during 2005-06. But expectations have remained elevated during 2007
despite the easing in inflation in the second half of the year.

Conclusion
After a long period of stability, we have experienced a major financial shock that has
reverberated through the banking sector in all the advanced economies. It has calmed
recently, but we should expect a prolonged period of discomfort for individual banks
and the financial system as a whole. Unusually, this shock was not the result of bad
loans at home but it will have an impact on growth through tighter credit constraints
and by influencing expectations and confidence. We cannot be sure how large those
effects will be but they pose a serious downside risk to growth. To make matters more
difficult, we face a sharp rise in inflation in coming months as a result of rising
commodity prices worldwide and a fall in our exchange rate.

In reaching our decisions, the MPC always looks not just at the central projection for
the economy but at the risks on either side. That will require not just difficult
judgements but careful explanation in the months ahead.

9

Chart 1: ABS CDO issuance

Chart 2: Prices of US sub-prime mortgage credit
default swaps(a)
$ billion
225

CDO^2

200

Mezz ABS CDO

175

HG ABS CDO

150

US$
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Jan
2008

125

AAA
AA
A
BBB
BBB-

100
75
50
25
2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

0

Jan
2007

Apr

Jul

Oct

Source: Citi

Source: Bank calculations.
(a) ABX.HE 2006 H2. Each index references 20 home equity loan (HEL)
ABS of indicated rating issued in 2006 H1. Sub-prime loans form the vast
majority of the collateral backing HEL ABS.

Chart 3: 3-month LIBOR spreads over expected
policy rates

Chart 4: RMBS issuance by all UK resident issuers

Basis points

£ blns
(three month rolling sum)
60

120

(b)
Sterling

100

50

US dollar
80

Euro

40

60

30

40

20
10

20

0
0
Apr
2007

Jul

Oct

Jan
2008

Source: Bloomberg.
(a) 3-month LIBOR spreads over 3-month overnight index swap (OIS)
rates.
(b) Coordinated central bank measures announced (12th Dec 2007).

00

01

02

03

04

05

06

07

Source: Dealogic. Data to end-December 2007

10

Chart 5: Mortgage arrears and possessions rates

Chart 6: Household secured and corporate credit
availability
Net percentage balances(a)

Percentage greater than 3 months in arrears

Percent
0.9

Household
Secured

7

0.8

30
Corporate

20

6

10

0.7
5

0.6

0

4

0.5
0.4

-10
-20

3

Possessions (LHS)

-30

0.3

2

0.2

Arrears (RHS)

-40

1

0.1
0
1990

Easier
credit

-50
-60

0
1993

1995

1998

2001

2004

2006

Source: CML
Back cast data before 1994

Tighter
credit

Q2

Q3

Q4

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Q1

Reported change, past three months
Expected change, next three months
Source: Bank of England Credit Conditions Survey

Chart 7: Quoted mortgage spreads

Chart 8: Mortgage product availability
(a)

Thousands

Basis point spread to funding rate
250
SVR

Credit impaired
Prime

200
150

Bank Rate Tracker
100

5 yr fixed

50
0
2 yr fixed
-50
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Source: Bank of England.
(a) SVR mortgages spread over one month lag of Bank Rate; Tracker
mortgages spread over Bank Rate; 2 yr, and 5 yr fixed rate mortgages
spread over one month lag of 2 and 5 year swap rates.

Feb Mar AprMay Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec End
Dec
Source: MoneyFacts.

11

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Chart 9: Household saving ratio

Chart 10: Correlation between growth in house
prices and consumption
Rolling ten-year correlation coefficient between real
annual house price inflation and consumption growth

16%
14%

1.0
0.9
0.8

12%

0.7

10%

0.6

8%

0.5
0.4

6%

0.3
0.2

4%

0.1

2%

0.0

0%
1970 1975

1966 1971 1976 1981 1986 1991 1996 2001 2006

1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005

Source: ONS

Source: Bank calculations.

Chart 11: Commodity prices

Chart 12: General public inflation expectations

US dollars per barrel
Index, 2000=100
120
350
Economist food index (rhs)
100

Economist metals index (rhs)

300

Brent oil spot prices (lhs)

250

80

3.2
Bank/NOP

3.0
2.8
2.6

200

2.4

60
40
20

150

2.2

100

2.0

50

1.8

0
0
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
Source: datastream and bank calculations

1.6
Feb00

Feb01

Feb02

Feb- Feb03
04

Feb05

Feb06

Feb07

Source: Bank of England/NOP public attitudes to inflation survey.

12

