ADAM S. POSEN
EXTERNAL MEMBER, MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE, BANK OF ENGLAND
AND SENIOR FELLOW, PETERSON INSTITUTE FOR INTERNATIONAL ECONOMICS

THE REALITIES AND RELEVANCE OF JAPAN’S GREAT RECESSION
NEITHER RAN NOR RASHOMON

STICERD Public Lecture, London School of Economics
24 May 2010

The Realities and Relevance of Japan’s Great Recession
Adam S. Posen1

“Human beings share the same common problems. A film can only be understood if it depicts
these properly.” – Akira Kurosawa (1910-1998)
Thank you all for turning out on a Monday night. It is a true privilege for me to give a lecture in
this particular hall, here at LSE, where generations of scholars from whom I have learnt a great
deal have taught, and where many current colleagues have been so generous and welcoming. In
particular, I would like to thank my predecessor on the Bank of England’s Monetary Policy
Committee, Professor Timothy Besley, for his invitation to speak here under STICERD’s
auspices. I am honoured to share that and a few other experiences with Tim, but ultimately I can
only aspire to his combined record of academic excellence and true public service.

Given the prestige of this distinguished venue and the quality of the audience, the temptation is
to give a full summum of all that I have learnt or thought about the last twenty-five years of
Japanese economic history, encompassing the bubble, the Great Recession, and what followed.2
Setting myself such a wide remit, however, would go against everything I ever learnt about
public speaking, let alone the limits of your patience, and luckily for all of you, that concern will
prevail. Instead, I would like to focus on one-and-a-half topics: what really happened when
Japan’s economic success story of the preceding decades turned into a decade of unprecedented
stagnation from 1992-2002; and the relevance of that experience for what the other advanced
1

My current research in this area is supported by a grant from the Ford Foundation, which I gratefully acknowledge.
Thomas Hellebrandt and Neil Meads have provided excellent research assistance with this work. My earlier
research on which I draw was partially supported by generous grants to PIIE by Sony Corporation (through the Akio
Morita Studies Program) and by Toyota Motor Corporation. The views expressed here are solely my own, and not
those of the Bank of England, the MPC, or any of its staff, or of PIIE.
2
That full thinking would draw on work from ongoing collaborations with Ken Kuttner and Erika Wada, as well as
with Hellebrandt and Meads. I have also benefitted from years of exchanges on these issues with Arthur Alexander,
Larry Ball, Tam Bayoumi, Fred Bergsten, Moreno Bertoldi, Olivier Blanchard, Barry Bosworth, Tom Cargill, Chris
Carroll, Mac Destler, Mitch Fukao, Bill Gale, William Grimes, Koichi Hamada, Fumio Hayashi, Takeo Hoshi,
Kiyoto Ido, Ryota Isshiki, Taka Ito, Richard Jerram, Toshiki Jinushi, Randall Jones, Ken Kang, Anil Kashyap, Rick
Katz, Yasuhiro Kawaguchi, Paul Krugman, Jun Kurihara, Ed Lincoln, Bob Litan, Robert Madsen, Ryoichi Mikitani,
Rick Mishkin, Martin Muhleisen, Seiya Nakajima, Masao Nishikawa, Kiyohiko Nishimura, Marc Noland, Hugh
Patrick, Hitoshi Shimura, Jim Shinn, James Toyama, Kazuo Ueda, Steve Vogel, David Weinstein, and Tadao
Yanase. Nonetheless, responsibility for the views, conclusions, and errors herein, however, remains mine alone.

2

economies, particularly the United Kingdom, are facing today. In other words, what does it
mean for an economy to ‘turn Japanese’ and what determines whether it will?

In light of today’s global financial crisis following sizable asset price bubbles, the accumulation
of public debt, the cutting of most central banks’ instrument interest rates to effectively zero
levels, the widespread failure or impairment of systemically important financial institutions, and
the worrisome trends towards deflation emerging in some major economies – all seen previously
in Japan’s Great Recession - those seem to me like potentially important questions to address.3 I
am afraid that the answers to them I will suggest tonight will be only partly reassuring. My
argument in brief is that:
•

Japan’s Great Recession was the result of a series of macroeconomic and financial policy
mistakes. Thus, it was largely avoidable once the initial shock from the bubble bursting
had passed. This is demonstrated by the underappreciated strength of Japan’s recovery
once policies were reversed in 2002-03 under the leadership of Prime Minister Koizumi,
Economics Minister Takenaka, and Bank of Japan Governor Fukui.

•

Japan actually had a number of structural advantages that made its stagnation all the more
avoidable, particularly with respect to fiscal policy. Structural deficiencies in Japan’s
financial system and in its corporate governance offset these when the deflation persisted.

•

The aberration in Japan’s recession was not the behaviour of growth, which is best seen
as a series of recoveries aborted by policy errors – a sawtooth, not a flat line. Rather, the
surprise was the persistent steadiness of limited deflation, even after recovery took place.
This strikes me as a more fundamental challenge to our basic macroeconomic
understanding than is commonly recognized, and we need more research on it.

•

The UK and US economies are at low risk of turning Japanese in the sense of having
recurrent recessions through macroeconomic policy mistakes - but deflation itself cannot
be ruled out. The UK worryingly combines a couple of financial parallels to Japan with

3

The inestimable Paul Krugman recently brought this prospect up in his column just last week: “Lost Decade
Looming,” May 20, 2010, New York Times, http://www.nytimes.com/2010/05/21/opinion/21krugman.html.

3

far less room for fiscal action to compensate for them than Japan had. More active
investors and greater openness in the UK than in Japan may be able to turn this around.
•

One major problem which Japan did not face during its Great Recession was poor
prospects for external demand and the need to reallocate productive resources across
export sectors. The UK, US, and many Euro Area economies do now face this challenge
simultaneously, which may limit the pace of, and our share in, the global recovery.

Ultimately, my main analytic point is for people to stop thinking of ‘turning Japanese’ as a
syndrome, some sort of strange condition into which an economy can fall.4 Instead, we should
think of Japan’s Great Recession as largely demonstrating the validity of much textbook, even
old fashioned Keynesian, macroeconomics – and thus amenable both to comprehension and,
within limits, avoidance, or at least amelioration. As a result, while our economies in Europe
and the US may not ever ‘turn Japanese,’ we all share some risks and problems in common with
Japan circa 1995. The sense of exoticism of the Japanese economy, shared by many scholars let
alone commentators, inside and outside Japan is even more misleading now than it was when
Americans and Europeans looked wonderingly at Japan’s miraculous economic performance of
the 1950s-1980s.

In this, I am inspired by the legendary Japanese film director Akira Kurosawa, who was known
for bringing universal human concerns and motifs back and forth from the West to Japan5.
While historical context mattered greatly in his films, he was able to emphasize the underlying
common themes and see analogies across cultures. Shakespeare and Hollywood westerns
inspired his classic films Throne of Blood, The Hidden Fortress, Ran, and the Seven Samurai,
which in turn led to The Magnificent Seven, A Bug’s Life, and Star Wars in the US. Kurosawa’s
assertion of Western models’ relevance to Japanese experience was initially controversial at
home, and the globalization of his work was seen as suspect, but proved ultimately to be
vindicated by its global reception. Japan’s economic experience is similarly of universal
relevance, offering parallels to today, but not some alternative state of the world.
4
5

I contributed to this proclivity in the past. See Posen (2003a,b).
See Galbraith (2002), Prince (1999), and Richie (1998) for discussion of Kurosawa’s cinema and life.

4

Not Ran: Japan’s economic fate was not sealed by the bubble –

In Kurosawa’s Ran, a retelling of King Lear, at the start of the film the old monarch makes a bad
allocation of assets – control of his land and forces - to some of his less than trustworthy
managers, and fails to exercise proper oversight. The result is a painful and unavoidable
downfall, through dispossession, war, destruction, and death. Sometimes one gets the feeling that
is how many observers see Japan’s Great Recession: a mistaken decision was made with regard
to over-investment, or to monetary ease encouraging that investment, in the 1980s, and the rest
was inevitable. Huge bubbles built up in equities and real estate, corporate and household
balance sheets became leveraged, banks became fragile, and according to this story, once asset
prices crashed, the stagnation of the Japanese economy was the unavoidable result.6 Others
claimed that Japan had a huge build-up of structural problems that could no longer borne, or
even had a negative productivity shock, to the same effect: inexorable decline (Proponents of
demographic decline as an explanation of Japan’s problems also fit in this structural slump
camp). Japan then supposedly went into a protracted period of slow and sometimes negative
growth, and policy attempts to reverse this were futile at best. One hears similar characterization
today from some quarters of the prospects for the UK and other economies which faced bubbles
bursting in the last couple of years.

Like Lear and Ran, this is a compelling narrative for economic discussion, one that encourages
the viewer to ponder the folly of those who believe too much in their power to see the future and
are too confident in the good times of today. For all its dramatic and seemingly ethical power,
however, it is not a narrative that fits the facts of Japan’s experience. As I put it in Posen
(2004a), it takes more than a bubble to become Japan. As shown in figure 1, Japanese real GDP
growth was far from flat during the lost decade, let alone in the time since 2002. Yes, there were
severe recessions in 1997-1999 and 2001-2002, following the recession upon the initial impact of
Japanese bubbles bursting in 1992. But, in between, the Japanese economy recovered, growing
steadily for two or three years at a time. And while these recoveries were not enormously rapid,
6

Sophisticated analyses sometimes used to buttress this argument include Bayoumi (2001) and Hoshi and Kashyap
(1999). I decline to list the many pundits’ books and articles advancing this mistaken view.

5

neither were they paltry by the standards of an advanced economy at the global technological
frontier, nor out of line with the kinds of recovery we can see in most economies following a
financial crisis, i.e., a return to trend growth rates without much catch-up (Posen (2004a,
2010b)).

More importantly, these recoveries in Japan in the 1990s were not in any sense artificial, as in
bought solely through government borrowing or export markets, though both factors of course
contributed as they should to an economy in recession. As I first argued in Posen (1998), and
with additional data to draw on and analyses with Ken Kuttner in Kuttner and Posen (2001),
these were recoveries which could have been sustainable, but were cut off by macroeconomic
policy mistakes. Figure 2 breaks down the components of quarterly Japanese real GDP growth
during the worst of the lost decade. One can see that understandably a decline in private
investment following the bubble drove the initial 1992-1994 recession, and that during the
recovery private consumption and investment growth played a greater role than either public
spending or net exports (the latter actually negative for most of 1994-1997).

It was then withdrawal of public investment and zeroing out of public consumption, along with
banking problems, which provided the negative shock in 1997 leading to the renewed recession
of 1998-1999.7 Insufficiently loosened monetary policy contributed, a point to which I will
return later. As shown in Figure 3, continuing the GDP breakdown through the 2000s, the
Japanese economy recovered strongly in 2000-2001, a period of withdrawal of public investment
(again) and limited public consumption (driven by automatic stabilizers); the public sector side
of GDP is shown in more detail in Figures 4 and 5. At this point, it was mounting financial
fragility in the core of Japan’s banking system, exacerbated by fears of monetary tightening, that
provided the negative shock leading to a sharp collapse in private investment, driving the
economy back into recession.8 Again, the picture is that of a market economy showing some
natural tendencies to recovery being stymied by policy mistakes.

7

In Kuttner and Posen (2001, 2002), we more carefully estimate the size and relative importance of the fiscal shock
using a VAR framework, building on Blanchard and Perotti’s (2002) techniques, though the extent of the fiscal
shock as opposed to perceptions of fiscal laxity was first documented in Posen (1998).
8
See Kuttner and Posen (2004), Posen (2001), and Hoshi and Kashyap (2004) for analyses of these factors.

6

The subsequent recovery of Japan from late 2002 up until the global financial crisis of summer
2008 is equally telling. As I argued in Posen (2001a), there was good reason to think that
Japan’s underlying potential growth rate was not only undiminished by the recession (though
less than it appeared in to be in the late 1980s), but actually had increased due to structural
reforms undertaken over the course of the 1990s. These included, energy market deregulation,
some better utilization of women in the workforce, new entrants in retail due to the rise of
Chinese and East Asian production and telecoms deregulation (under US pressure), as well as
financial market liberalization.9 What was necessary was the clean-up and recapitalization of the
banking system, the further loosening of monetary policy (to the extent possible given that
interest rates were at zero), and the avoidance of any further premature fiscal tightening, as I set
out in Posen (1998, 1999a, and 2001b). This was obviously not a simple list, economically or
politically. Yet, it was also not a list of the impossible, it emphasized demand side factors, and
was a list that seemed all the more plausible when Japanese policymakers recognized that Japan
was not doomed to a permanently low trend growth rate – a belief that had bedevilled both fiscal
and monetary policy decisions in Japan for much of the 1990s.

Japan’s new economic leadership in the early 2000s, Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi, Cabinet
Office and later Financial Services Minister Heizo Takenaka, and Bank of Japan Governor
Toshihiko Fukui, turned matters around. They reversed monetary policies that contributed to
deflation, turned the fiscal impulse to average net zero (see figure 5), and forced bad loan writeoffs and recapitalization by the Japanese banks (figure 6).10 What few seem to appreciate, either
inside or outside of Japan, is just how strong the resulting Japanese recovery from 2002-2008
was. It was the longest unbroken recovery of Japan’s postwar history, and, while not as strong as
pre-bubble Japanese performance, was in fact stronger than the growth in comparable economies
even when fuelled by their own bubbles.

As shown in figure 7, Japanese annual total factor productivity growth was the highest or second
highest among the G5 (France, Germany, Japan, UK, US) in most pre-crisis years of the last
9

Yes, juxtaposed with fragile banks, which was part of the problem; see Hoshi and Kashyap (1999), Shimizu
(2000), and Ueda (2000). But this gives some hope to Euro Area members that structural reform can yield rapid
dividends.
10
Posen (2004b) sets out “What Went Right in Japan.” See also Posen (2009a) for discussion of this policy success.

7

decade – the recovery was no simple sopping up of idle resources. Looking at the averages for
the period between the start of Japanese recovery (2002:Q2) and the start of the global crisis
(2008:Q3), given in Figure 8, Japan had the highest average annual GDP growth per worker and
by far the highest annual TFP growth. In Posen (2002a), I had made the case that the high rate of
technological innovation in Japan was largely unchanged over the course of the 1990s, and that
shortfalls in private investment due to the preceding recessions were demand (or financially)
rather than productivity driven – this case is borne out by the subsequent productivity
performance of Japan that I just documented.11

It is worth belabouring this point, not just to give myself credit for getting a call or two correct.
It is worth belabouring this point to emphasize that Japan was not in structural decline during the
1990s, that the series of recessions were demand (and macroeconomic policy) driven and were
not real business cycles, that therefore this was avoidable and policy could help matters. This
illustrates what has become known at the Bank as ‘Adam’s left-arm principle’ – the workers and
investors of Japan did not wake up one day in 1992 and find that their left arms had fallen off,
and, for that matter, the workers and investors of the United Kingdom still have their left arms,
too. In other words, policymakers and economists must not reason backwards from a period of
growth shortfall that aggregate supply or growth potential have significantly fallen, and lower
their sights for policy response as a result.

The real costs of recession and even financial crisis tend to accumulate over time as job loss
turns to long-term unemployment, and as financial disruption turns to under-investment and
capital misallocation. This is why a number of central bankers, myself included, have argued for
very strong immediate monetary response to negative shocks, so as to forestall this process
insofar as possible. It is impossible to completely offset such negative structural effects, and
unfortunately, I believe that there is reason to think they will be larger and more immediate in the
UK today than they were in Japan in the 1990s, as I will discuss shortly. Yet, large persistent

11

This raises the issue of how the banking sector disruption and fabled misallocation of capital in the Japanese
economy did not result in worse structural harms to productivity. I am working on research in this area, supported
by the Ford Foundation, and hope to have some reasonable hypotheses and data for them over this summer.

8

output gaps do arise, as Japan demonstrates, and should be treated as reparable.12 They should
also presumably push down on inflation (as discussed in the explanation of our most recent MPC
forecast in the May 2010 Inflation Report), though perhaps not as straightforwardly as we used
to think they would, as I note below.

Not Rashomon: Japan’s policy measures had mostly textbook effects –

Rashomon, Kurosawa’s ground-breaking film giving four participants’ differing perspectives on
the same act of violence, has become a code word for the undependability of human memory, or
at least the differences in personal experiences of the same event. Anthropologists, sociologists
and legal scholars all invoke the ‘Rashomon Effect’ when speaking of contested views of
causality, for example of guilt and intention in criminal cases. Here, however, economists
should be trying to get away from this cinematic – and very human – sense of indeterminacy and
lack of clarity. While economics is surely not a science, empirical evaluation of macroeconomic
policies and their impact can and must proceed on the basis of common standards of evidence
and argument leading to some accumulation of generally agreed results.

As Kuttner and Posen (2001) argued, what Japan’s Great Recession demonstrates is the accuracy
of many of our predictions about policy from the mainstream macroeconomics literature, even of
the intermediate textbook level. This is of course of a piece with my broader case that Japan’s
experience is amenable to the same means of understanding as macroeconomic events in other
advanced economies, but the point goes further. We have ways of specifying what was extreme
or structurally different about Japan’s situation – size of the shock, closedness of the economy,
the zero interest rate bound – and make our policy judgments conditional on those assessments.
And in the main, those conditional judgments were borne out by the facts.

If ever there seemed to be a Rashomon Effect in economic policy discussion, it would be with
regard to fiscal stimulus and its impact. Whether in Japan in the 1990s or in the US in 20082010, heated discussions take place as though the short-run effects of fiscal policy were in
12

See Bernanke (2000) arguing against “self-induced paralysis” in monetary policy, and also Posen (1999b, 2000).
The idea that Japan’s difficulties were serious and demand-related was first advanced independently by Krugman
(1998) and Posen (1998). Krugman achieved a unique level of theoretical insight into the problem, however.

9

dispute. They should not be. Fiscal policy works when it is tried. When one takes into account
such factors as openness and size of the economy undertaking fiscal policy, and the
government’s starting debt position, and so on, one can reasonably expect some diminishment of
fiscal policy’s impact for smaller, more open, more indebted economies. There is no good
evidence, however, of strong Ricardian offsets to fiscal policy or of immediate crowding out by
interest rates (unless the economy is already overheating or at unsustainable debt levels).13
This is conclusively demonstrated by Japan.14 As we argued in Kuttner and Posen (2002):

“[O]ur results provide little support for the Ricardian equivalence hypothesis under
perhaps the most propitious conditions ever seen for it to hold: a rapid and large increase
in the public debt contemporaneous with a widely publicized projection of the
demographic dangers to social security benefits, in an economy already prone to high
rates of saving...Our examination of the effects of fiscal policy in Japan in the 1990s has
taken us on what seems to be a tour of macroeconomics’ past: when economies were
closed, savers were myopic, and consequently fiscal stabilization is effective.” (p. 554)
Charles Horioka and his colleagues predicted and then documented a long-term demographically
driven decline in Japan’s household savings rate, also totally inconsistent with Ricardian
predictions.15 In a seminal paper, Broda and Weinstein (2005) assessed the net rather than gross
debt position of Japanese government, finding it to be only half that often cited gross level, and
pointed out how demographics did not mean automatic fiscal unsustainability. Faruqee and
Muhleisen (2003) showed how even potentially beneficial long-term social security reforms
would still involve short-term output losses, and that “sharp tightening measures should be held
back until private demand has reached sustainable levels.” (p.21).

Note, however, that this assessment is not a blank check for unlimited fiscal stimulus at every
time, everywhere. Japan in the 1990s was where fiscal activism should have worked the best,
being closed, with passive highly home-biased savers, and a large economy with essentially no

13

Auerbach and Gale (2009) make this argument strongly, assessing the latest developments. See also Ball and
Mankiw (2005), Kuttner and Posen (2001), Mankiw and Elmendorf (1998), and Posen (1998).
14
Not all disagreement on this assessment is ideologically driven. Complexities of the Japanese fiscal system
(Broda and Weinstein (2005); Ishii and Wada (1998)) and failure to properly account for the tax revenue impact of
declining GDP growth (Kuttner and Posen (2002); Posen (1998)) contributed to some of the confusion.
15
See Horioka (2006) and the references therein.

10

foreign indebtedness. Having a low government share in GDP and a low tax base also means the
distortions incurred by sustained fiscal expansions are of relatively low cost. Looking at today’s
world, only the US shares these attributes with Japan, and can thus afford to engage in ongoing
fiscal stimulus in a protracted recession – and the lesser passivity of US savers and increasing
American foreign indebtedness suggest some limit will be reached. For smaller, more open
economies, with larger state sectors, like the United Kingdom, the news is not as good. There
will be leakage of fiscal stimulus abroad so it will be less effective than in Japan; the willingness
of the markets to rollover public debt will be more limited, especially if the size of the public
sector and the tax share are reaching diminishing returns.16 Cross-national empirical research,
such as that summarized in Cadoan (2009), supports this view.17 Thus, while fiscal stimulus was
the right response by a wide range of economies, including the UK, to the immediate crisis in
2008-09, consistent with one lesson from Japan, we cannot sustain it like Japan should have.

Monetary policy is another place where research has tried to get past the Rashomon Effect when
looking at Japan in the 1990s. We have had considerably more success in getting agreement
here, not only inside and outside Japan, but across a wide ideological spectrum. By common
assent, Bank of Japan policy was too late and too timid in loosening monetary conditions, and
too reluctant to take up unconventional measures when the zero lower bound on nominal interest
rates was reached.18 A wide variety of policy response functions have been estimated under
various assumptions, and essentially all suggest that the BOJ could and should have been more
aggressive in the early 1990s when rates were above zero and the crisis initially hit. A good
example is given in figure 9, from Harrigan and Kuttner (2005). As Kuttner and Posen (2004)
point out, these reaction functions are not very robust, and become more difficult to estimate
meaningfully when deflation occurs – but that only further emphasizes the missed opportunity.
Some observers would suggest that the monetary game was in some sense lost when
unconventional measures were not undertaken before longer- term nominal interest rates went to

16

Public sector investment is not worse than private sector investment per se, and having a larger state than the US
or Japan offers the macroeconomic benefit of greater automatic stabilization, so it is not a one way case.
17
See also Posen (2005) on the variation in fiscal response and impact with size and openness during Europe’s
recession of the early 2000’s.
18
Notable works in this spirit include Ahearne, et al (2002), Bernanke (2000), Bernanke, Reinhart, and Sack (2004),
Cargill, Hutchison, and Ito (2001), Harrigan and Kuttner (2005), Krugman (1998), Ito and Mishkin (2005), Jinushi,
Kuroki, and Miyao (2000), Kuttner (2004), Kuttner and Posen (2001), Posen (1999b), and Svensson (2003).

11

zero.19 My personal belief is that the critical though closely related concern is whether the
financial system is in shape to transmit monetary policy, not the interest rate per se, and that
when rates go to zero unconventional policy can still work, albeit with difficulty and uncertainty
about its effects. (Posen (2009b))

Where Rashomon has its revenge is in trying to make sense of what happened subsequently on
the monetary side. As shown in figure 10, every measure of inflation in Japan turned negative in
around 1995, and stayed negative (with only a brief respite in 1998) until at least 2004. It was in
the second half of this period, from 2001 to 2006, that the Bank of Japan undertook its version of
‘Quantitative Easing’ to seemingly little nominal effect. Yes, there was an output gap in the
early 2000’s still to be absorbed, but it is difficult to reconcile any reasonable estimate of the size
of that gap – even based on my own previously considered to be too optimistic assessment of
Japanese potential growth prospects – with the persistence of deflation seen. Alternatively, if the
output gap was actually that large, why did deflation not accelerate over the course of the 1990s
instead of remaining stable? There certainly was no shortage of narrow money creation or of
government bond purchases by the Bank of Japan when they got started, and no concomitant
increase in broad money growth (see figure 11).

The general assessment by econometric investigators to date is that QE did have some impact on
inflation expectations and expectations about monetary policy as a commitment mechanism, but
had little direct effect on asset or other prices.20 Thus, a key part of the Bank of Japan’s efforts at
combating deflation was the public commitment given in 2002 to maintain low rates until
inflation was reliably forecast to remain positive (Posen (2004b)). Figure 12, extending a chart
from Kuttner and Posen (2004), suggests that ‘deflation scares’ where the Bank of Japan was
seen to be threatening rate hikes did have an impact on long-term interest rates and presumably
expectations beyond that of the world (US) interest rate, and that these have been absent since
the Bank of Japan’s commitment to pursue positive inflation. But we all must admit that it is
rather difficult to tell in any convincing rather than suggestive manner.
19

Krugman (1998) sets out the theory of the liquidity trap, while Tucker (2009) cites this concern in guiding his
policy activist decisions of 2009 at the Bank of England.
20
Ugai (2006) gives a useful summary of some of the assessments. See also Baba, et al (2005), Baba, et al (2006),
Kimura and Small (2006), Oda and Ueda (2005), Okina and Shiratsuka (2004), and Ueda (2002). Tomas
Hellebrandt, Neil Meads, and I have work in progress attempting to make another assessment.

12

This leads of course directly to concerns about the Bank of England’s own QE policy of late and
its impact. As also shown in figure 11, the Bank of England has created narrow money at an
even faster rate, sooner, than the Bank of Japan did, and seemingly has had just as little impact
on broad money growth. In part, this is overstated, because the private counterparties from
whom the Bank of England buys its gilts in the secondary market (i.e., pension funds and
insurance companies) are different from the counterparties of the Bank of Japan on its purchases
(banks), so controlling for that in the flow of funds reveals a slightly higher broad money growth
rate. Much more importantly, however, the proof is in the outcome: inflation has remained
positive in the UK, despite at least as large a negative shock as Japan experienced in 1992, and
that seems in part to be driven by QE’s affect on asset prices.21 My MPC colleague, Spencer
Dale (2010) recently summarized the results of some of the Bank staff’s own research:

“[A]bsent the monetary injection, broad money would almost certainly have been far
weaker...summing movements in gilt-OIS spreads following our [asset purchase]
announcements suggests that the portfolio balance effect may have reduced gilt yields by
around 100 basis points...Since we started QE, equity prices have increased by more than
50%, and corporate bond yields have fallen by over 400 basis points.”

In Japan during the Bank of Japan’s QE period there was no such fall in corporate bond yields
and even some rise (albeit from very low levels probably reflecting the recovery), and there
certainly was no 50% rise in equity prices. It remains to be seen whether the equity rise in the
UK and elsewhere is sustainable (I have no opinion, just hopes). Moreover, even if the Bank of
England successfully avoids both deflation and inflation in contrast to Japan’s deflation, but
Japan has yet another recovery and the UK recovery is weak or cutoff, that is not a happy
outcome for the UK vis-a-vis Japan.

To me, the upshot of all of this Rashomon effect about QE there and here is twofold. One, of
course, is a call for more and cleverer research than I and others have mustered to date – research
that should focus less on the immediate announcement or asset price impact of QE (though that
21

No, I am not happy that UK CPI inflation is currently overshooting the Bank’s government given inflation target.
As I have said in the press of late, if this proves to be other than temporary factors at work, the MPC should take
action. But I’d certainly rather have us temporarily overshooting by around 1% than facing oncoming deflation.

13

was the right place to start), and more on the transmission mechanism. It is at least plausible that
part of the better real economic results Japan had over the course of the 2000’s than the UK has
since early 2009 is due to the more advanced state of the banking system restructuring
undertaken by Takenaka in 2003 versus what has been done to date in the UK and in other major
markets. That should, however, have shown up somewhere in broad money growth at some
time, one would think. We also need more research on the costs of deflation, and why they seem
to have been much lower in Japan than we reasonably would have expected ex ante. There is no
question that deflation has been a drag on growth, and, even at Japan’s low interest rates, make
government debt service more difficult. But it has not been a disaster.22

The other lesson for me, as a central banker, is to have much more humility about what we are
capable of doing with monetary policy, especially with unconventional measures.23 Monetary
policy has been unable in Japan remove deflation quickly in any easy way. Even the above zero
inflation we have maintained in the UK has hardly been commensurate with what many of the
monetarist persuasion would have predicted, given the scale of the Bank of England’s asset
purchases (Posen (2009b)). We also do not understand deflation very well - whatever type of
standard macro model one uses for analysis, you will find it difficult to generate the persistent
for a decade, sticky, but steady at -1%, deflation Japan experienced, rather than something that
accelerated either up or down, and did more harm.24 As a result, we should stay away from very
mechanistic monetarism that, “Oh, boy, they’ve printed a lot of money so at some point that has
to turn into inflation.” Or, “If we do this specific amount of quantitative easing, so it will lead to
this result.” Looking at Japan, it is clear that their quantitative easing measures had the right sign,
in the sense of removing fears of tightening, but did not have a predictable or even large shortterm result, let alone cause high inflation.

22

A partial explanation for that may be the real and nominal wage flexibility in Japan. See Kimura and Ueda (2001).
I have made this point in appearances before both the UK House of Commons Treasury Select Committee and the
US Congress Joint Economic Committee. Setting the bar of expectations low for my own role might be a factor.
24
See the Phillips Curve based analysis in De Veriman (2007) for some evidence on this point.
23

14

A Partial Remake?: Where the UK has some Japanese risks –

As I said earlier, Kurosawa not only brought Western models and inspiration into his films in
Japan, but he in turn inspired remakes and homages, or even particular scenes, in Western films
in turn. So if the macroeconomic policy response undertaken so far by the UK and other major
economies makes it unlikely our economy will ‘turn Japanese’ precisely – especially now that I
have explained to you what turning Japanese actually meant in the 1990s and 2000s – what
particular aspects of Japan’s Great Recession might be relevant and of concern? What kind of
remake might we see of the story for an unwilling UK audience? Unfortunately, the ironic twist
for this upcoming film is that in some ways the remake might be scarier than the original. That
risk arises not only because the original Great Recession was not quite so scary as previously
thought on close viewing, but because Japan actually had various resources with which to
manage its situation while the UK and other economies are not similarly endowed, even if some
Japanese policymakers failed to take advantage of them.

The first set of advantages Japan had over the UK today in responding to a recessionary shock
comes from its relative closedness and passivity of its domestic savers and investors. Fiscal
stimulus will be more limited in its effect and less sustainable on a large scale in the UK than it
was in Japan. The threat of savings leaving the UK for other currency-denominated assets is
low, but not zero, and has responded to fiscal concerns in the past. In contrast, clearly Japanese
savers have been unwilling to move a large share of their savings abroad, no matter what has
occurred with public debt to date.25 The multiplier on Japanese fiscal stimulus was higher than it
has been in the UK. The upshot is that declaring a limit on fiscal stimulus in the UK well before
Japan should have is sound policy, yet no one should doubt this will be painful in terms of
aggregate GDP growth (beyond its direct human effects), either. The loss may be less than some
fear, since a low multiplier works for cuts as well as spending, but given where interest rates are
now, there will be no bonus from fiscal discipline. This is about pre-empting an interest rate rise.

25

Nishimura (2007) gives a fascinating analysis of capital flows and household savings behavior in Japan, noting
among other things that very large outflows in absolute terms from Japan are only a small portion of investors’
portfolios, and that household investors (the Mrs. Watanabe’s) have offset professionals’ moves to stabilize.

15

A second difference from Japan that works against the UK in our current situation is the amount
of reallocation of labor and capital across sectors that we need to undertake. Japan did and does
have a number of inefficient industries, and during the boom of the 1980s and even after had
unsustainably huge numbers of people employed in construction (Kuttner and Posen (2001)).
The most inefficient industries, however, were in Japan’s non-traded sector: health care, retail,
food production and distribution, as well as construction; by contrast, the export industries were
and remain highly competitive (Posen (2001a, 2002)), and Japan was running a trade surplus
except for a few years. The UK at present has to reallocate labor and capital into export-oriented
industries from where there has been domestic growth (health care and other services;
construction), or where the former export demand has suffered a structural decline (financial
services). The challenge should not be overstated, for the UK has one of the most flexible
economies in the world, past adjustment of the trade-weighted pound should ease the process,
and many recent survey-based and orders indicators suggest that UK manufacturing is
responding well to the shift in demand. That said, this challenge should not be dismissed, and
may have something to do with the disappointing performance of UK net exports over the last
several months of global and UK recovery.

A third place where Japan had an advantage in its recovery, which the UK but also several other
economies do not share, is in the availability of growing export markets. The role of exports in
Japan’s economy overall and in its recovery of 2002-2008 is usually exaggerated. As shown in
figure 3, net exports played a meaningful but not majority role. If anything, though, the UK –
and for that matter almost all other advanced economies except the US – is more dependent on
trade as a share of the economy than Japan. During Japan’s Great Recession, its primary trading
partners like the US were enjoying strong growth, and its immediate neighbours were only
briefly (though sharply) in recession in 1997-98. In the 2000’s, developing Asia and particularly
China took in an increasing share of Japanese exports, as shown in figure 13. The UK faces a
double-limitation on export-led growth in comparison. First, with most of the Western
economies in recession, there is more competition for export markets, and presumably at some
point the US, too, will have to close its trade deficit. As widely noted, not everyone can be a net
exporter at the same time. Second and more pressingly, the UK’s major export market remains
the Euro Area, as shown in figure 14. Let us just say that the prospects for strong growth in most
16

of the Euro Area are rather dim for the next several years, as are the prospects for a sustained
relative price adjustment by the UK against the Euro Area. Again, this is not insurmountable,
and trade patterns can change, especially if the China-bloc allows their currencies to adjust in
line with their productivity and domestic demand growth. But it does not help.

There are also two parallels for the UK with less salutary aspects of Japan’s situation. One I
brought up in a speech last October (Posen (2009b)). As summarized in figure 15, the UK has
limited alternative sources of corporate finance to its few big banks, some of whom are
obviously still impaired, and all of whom have to increase their capital bases and/or shrink their
balance sheets. The UK is thus similar to Japan, and unlike most other advanced economies, in
terms of its vulnerability to financial fragility. So far, there is some reason to think that a lot of
the very sharp decline in investment the UK experienced over the past 18-24 months can be
accounted for by a decline in investment demand, driven by uncertainty and temporarily (we
hope) lower growth prospects, and not be solely ascribed to a credit crunch. As I said in
October, the test will come when the recovery, thankfully now underway, leads to increased
investment demand by new firms and SME’s – will the concentrated and part-nationalized UK
banking system be ready to meet the demand for capital? In Japan, this kind of credit crunch did
play a key role in the third recession of the 1990s, until the bank reform of 2002.

Another parallel has emerged from some recent research in progress I have undertaken with Neil
Meads at the Bank. One distinctive aspect of Japan’s recovery was the accumulation of large
surpluses in the Japanese non-financial corporate sector, as depicted in figure 16.26 These
reached a high of nearly 10% of GDP in the middle of the 2000s, and after declining during the
global financial crisis have begun climbing again. This pattern was unusual, and sometimes
ascribed to Japan’s corporate governance. Yet, of late, we have seen a similar pattern emerge in
the UK. As shown in figure 17, since the global shock of 2008, UK non-financial corporate have
had their own surplus rise towards 8% of GDP. The good news is that this rules out a balance
sheet recession here as well (ditto for most households, though not quite so strongly so). The
26

An interesting side note is that this chart largely gives the lie to claims that Japan suffered a ‘balance sheet
recession,’ another of the Ran-type one-shock-and-done candidate explanations for the Great Recession. As is clear
from this chart, both corporate and household were net asset holders from 1995 onwards.

17

bad news is if this indicates some form of self-insurance by companies against lack of future
access to credit, in line with the structural financial parallels to Japan I set out, this will constrain
investment until access is credibly restored – which might take restructuring the UK financial
system (not a bad idea).

The worst news would be if this sitting on funds was not temporary but lasting. In that case, it
would represent a lack of faith in future UK economic prospects, meaning that despite all my
arguments UK investors do feel that their workers all woke up minus some body parts, or that
their previously purchased capital stock was somehow now redundant. That would be a
structural slump, with all the prospects for higher inflation (due to smaller output gap) and
slower growth (due to lower productivity trend) that portends. I do not believe this to be the
case. But even if it were, here is where the United Kingdom’s openness comes to our rescue in
the end, and Japan’s closed corporate governance came back to bite it. As shown in figure 18,
the UK has been consistently more willing to invest abroad than Japan. Even in the worst times
in the Great Recession, Japanese corporations sat on their cash, neither engaging in large-scale
FDI where productivity and growth prospects were higher, nor returning their cash to investors
(who would not move it abroad in any event).27

In the UK, even leaving aside the spike around 2000 related to some takeover activity,
corporations and their investors have been willing to move direct investment abroad in search of
higher returns. It is possible that some of what appears to accumulation of cash surpluses by UK
corporations over the last two years are actually acquisitions of investments abroad, which would
show up on the balance sheet as assets without showing up in GDP flows as corporate
investment. It certainly has not been due to M&A activity of late. If that proves to be the case,
returns on savings and corporate profits will be higher than they were for trapped capital in
Japan, which in turn will more sustainably feed consumption and productivity growth. So the
UK remake of the Japanese recession film need not be entirely a morose tear-jerker.

27

Alexander (2007) has an excellent discussion of returns to capital and comparative returns on FDI for Japan. See
also Fukao (1995) regarding globalization and corporate governance in general terms.

18

Perhaps Seven Samurai: A concluding note for policymakers –

Arguably Kurosawa’s greatest film, and my personal favourite, is The Seven Samurai (Shichinin
no Samurai).

28

The plot, having been emulated or remade by numerous subsequent filmmakers,

should be familiar to many who have not even seen the film. A village of farmers are threatened
by a severe negative shock, that bandits will return after the harvest to steal their crops. They are
incapable of defending the hard won fruits of their labor from this onslaught on their own. The
farmers hire seven masterless samurai to organize their defense, if not able to defend them
directly. The farmers, however, have limited resources to provide for their defense or paying the
samurai, and what they have is being hoarded in precautionary saving against the coming shock.
The samurai restore confidence to the village, and with an activist strategy to fight off the
bandits, albeit at a high cost in their lives lost. With the bandits defeated, the regular cycle of
farmers planting for the next year’s harvest begins again, surprisingly happily. The surviving
three samurai have won the battle for the farmers, but they have lost their comrades with no
place in normal society to show for it. "Again we are defeated," their leader, Kambei muses.
"The farmers have won. Not us."

I hope you see where I am going with this, and it is not to overdramatize the pressures of being a
central banker (actually a very nice if demanding job). Macroeconomic policymakers really
should have little to do when the business cycle is following its normal path. Fine tuning is
unnecessary, although obviously some ongoing unobtrusive monitoring of the situation is useful.
When a clear, large negative shock threatens to pull the cycle down into severe contraction,
central bankers and (to the extent feasible) fiscal authorities have to intervene, and do so proactively. No one should be over-confident that the shock can be costlessly offset or restored
fully to status quo ante bellum. Part of responding to a large negative shock successfully in fact
requires the policymakers to successful instil confidence and mobilize the general public. But
when it is all over, and even when the policy response has fended off the worst, the best a
macroeconomic policymaker can hope for is for the citizens to return to the normal cycle of life
– and desire the monetary samurai to go away again, unless and until another shock comes. May

28

See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seven_Samurai for more information.

19

it only be so that the UK recovers to its normal cycle of growth sufficiently, so that I and my
colleagues can sink back from the front line into our well-deserved technocratic obscurity.

20

References
Ahearne, Alan, Joseph Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steve Kamin, (2002). “Preventing Deflation:
Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s,” Federal Reserve Board International Finance Discussion
Paper 2002-729, June.
Alexander, Arthur (2007). The Arc of Japan’s Economic Development. Routledge.
Auerbach, Alan and William Gale (2009). “Activist Fiscal Policy to Stabilize Economic Activity,”
Proceedings of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium at Jackson Hole.
Baba, N., M. Nagashima, Y. Shigemi, and Kazuo Ueda (2006), “The Bank of Japan’s Monetary Policy
and Bank Risk Premiums in the Money Market,” International Journal of Central Banking, 2:1, 105-135.
Baba, N., S. Nishioka, N. Oda and M. Shirakawa , and Kazuo Ueda (2005), “Japan’s Deflation, Problems
in the Financial System and Monetary Policy,” BOJ Monetary and Economic Studies, February.
Ball, Laurence and N. Gregory Mankiw (1995). “What Do Deficits Do?” Proceedings of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium at Jackson Hole.
Bayoumi, Tamim (2001). “The Morning After: Explaining the Slowdown in Japanese Growth in the
1990s.” Journal of International Economics.
Bernanke, Ben (2000). “Japanese Monetary Policy: A Case of Self-Induced Paralysis?”, in Ryoichi
Mikitani and Adam S. Posen, eds., Japan’s Financial Crisis and its Parallels with U.S. Experience, IIE.
Bernanke, Ben, Vincent Reinhart, and Brian Sack, (2004). “Monetary Policy Alternatives at the Zero
Bound: An Empirical Assessment”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 2 (Fall): 1-78.
Blanchard, Olivier (2000). “Bubbles, Liquidity Traps, and Monetary Policy.” in Ryoichi Mikitani and
Adam S. Posen, eds., Japan’s Financial Crisis and its Parallels with U.S. Experience, IIE.
Blanchard, Olivier and Roberto Perotti (2002). “An Empirical Characterization of the Dynamic Effects of
Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November.
Broda, Christian and David Weinstein (2005). “Happy News from the Dismal Science: Reassessing
Japanese Fiscal Policy and Sustainability,” in Takatoshi Ito, Hugh Patrick, and David Weinstein, eds.
Reviving Japan’s Economy: Problems and Prescriptions, MIT Press
Cargill, Thomas, Michael Hutchison, and Takatoshi Ito (2001). Financial Policy and Central Banking in
Japan. MIT Press.
Dale, Spencer (2010). “QE One Year On,” Speech given at the CIMF and MMF Conference in
Cambridge, 12 March 2010.
De Veirman, E., (2007), “Which nonlinearity in the Phillips curve? The absence of accelerating deflation
in Japan,” Reserve Bank of New Zealand Discussion paper 2007/14

21

Elmendorf, Douglas W. and N. Gregory Mankiw, (1998). “Government Debt.” NBER Working Paper
No. W6470, March.
Faruqee, Hamid and Martin Muhleisen, (2003). “Population aging in Japan: demographic shock and fiscal
sustainability,” Japan and the World Economy, 15, (2), 185-210
Fukao, Mitsuhiro (1995). Financial Integration, Corporate Governance, and the Performance of
Multinational Companies. Brookings Institution Press.
Galbraith, Stuart (2002). The Emperor and the Wolf: The Lives and Films of Akira Kurosawa and Toshiro
Mifune. Faber & Faber.
Harrigan, James and Kenneth Kuttner (2005). “Lost Decade in Translation: Did the United States Learn
from Japan’s Post-bubble Mistakes?”, in Takatoshi Ito, Hugh Patrick, and David Weinstein, eds. Reviving
Japan’s Economy: Problems and Prescriptions, MIT Press
Horioka, Charles (2006). “The Causes of Japan’s ‘Lost Decade: The Role of Household Consumption,”
NBER Working Paper No. 12142.
Hoshi, Takeo and Anil Kashyap (2004). Corporate Financing and Governance in Japan: The Road to
the Future. MIT Press.
Hoshi, Takeo and Anil Kashyap (1999). “The Japanese Banking Crisis: Where Did It Come From and
How Will It End?”, in Ben Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual.
Ishii, Hiroko and Erika Wada (1998). “Local Government Spending: Solving the Mystery of Japanese
Fiscal Packages,” PIIE Working Paper No. 98-5.
Ito, Takatoshi and Frederic Mishkin (2005). “Monetary Policy in Japan: Problems and Solutions,” in
Takatoshi Ito, Hugh Patrick, and David Weinstein, eds. Reviving Japan’s Economy: Problems and
Prescriptions, MIT Press
Jinushi, Toshiki, Yoshihiro Kuroki, and Ryuzo Miyao, “Monetary Policy in Japan Since the Late 1980s:
Delayed Policy Actions and Some Explanations,” In Ryoichi Mikitani and Adam S. Posen, eds., Japan’s
Financial Crisis and its Parallels with U.S. Experience, IIE.
Kimura, T. and D. Small, (2006). “Quantitative Monetary Easing and Risk in Financial Asset Markets,”
The B.E. Journals in Macroeconomics, 6:1.
Kimura, T. and Kazuo Ueda (2001). “Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity in Japan,” Journal of the
Japanese and International Economies, Vol.15, No.1, March.
Krugman, Paul (1998). “It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap,” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 2.
Kuttner, Kenneth (2004). “Comments on ‘Price Stability and Japanese Monetary Policy’(2),” BOJ
Monetary and Economic Studies, 22:3, 37-46.

22

Kuttner, Kenneth and Adam Posen (2004). “The Difficulty of Discerning What’s Too Tight: Taylor
Rules and Japanese Monetary Policy,” with Kenneth Kuttner, North American Journal of Economics and
Finance, March 2004, pp. 53-74
Kuttner, Kenneth and Adam Posen (2002). “Fiscal Policy Effectiveness in Japan,” Journal of the
Japanese and International Economies, December 2002, pp. 536-558
Kuttner, Kenneth and Adam Posen (2001). “The Great Recession: Lessons for Macroeconomic
Policymakers from Japan,” with Kenneth Kuttner, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2001:2, pp.
93-185
McKinnon, Ronald, and Kenichi Ohno (1997). Dollar and yen: resolving economic conflict between the
United States and Japan, MIT Press.
Nishimura, Kiyohiko (2007). “Increased Diversity and Deepened Uncertainty: Policy Challenges in a
Zero Inflation Economy,” International Finance, 10:3, 281–300.
Oda, N. and Kazuo Ueda (2005). “The Effects of the Bank of Japan’s Zero Interest Rate Commitment
and Quantitative Monetary Easing on the Yield Curve: A Macro-Finance Approach,” Bank of Japan
Working Paper No. 05-E-6.
Okina, K., and S. Shiratsuka (2004). “Policy Commitment and Expectation Formation: Japan’s
experience under Zero Interest Rates,” North American Journal of Economics and Finance, 15:1, 75-100.
Padoan, Pier Carlo (2009). “Fiscal Policy in the Crisis: Impact, Sustainability, and Long-Term
Implications,” Asian Development Bank Institute Working Paper, No. 178.
Posen, Adam (2009c). “Finding the Right Tool for Dealing with Asset Price Booms,” Speech at the MPR
Monetary Policy and Markets Conference, London, 01 December 2009
Posen, Adam (2009b). “Getting Credit Flowing: A Non-Monetarist Approach to Quantitative Easing,”
Speech at CASS Business School, London, 26 October 2009
Posen, Adam (2009). “Seven Broad Lessons for the US from Japan’s Lost Decade,” Presentation at
Conference on Japan’s Lost Decade: Lessons for the United States, The Brookings Institution, March 26.
Posen, Adam (2005). “Can Rubinomics Work in the Eurozone?”, in Adam Posen, ed., The Euro at Five:
Ready for a Global Role?, PIIE.
Posen, Adam (2004b). “What Went Right in Japan,” IIE Policy Brief 04-6, September
Posen, Adam (2004a). “It Takes More Than a Bubble to Become Japan,” in Anthony Richards, ed., Asset
Prices and Monetary Policy, Reserve Bank of Australia, pp. 203-249
Posen, Adam (2003b). “Frog in a Pot: Germany’s Descent into the Japan Syndrome,” The National
Interest, Spring 2003, pp. 105-118
Posen, Adam (2003a). “Is Germany Turning Japanese?,” IIE Working Paper No. 03-5

23

Posen, Adam (2002). “Unchanging Innovation and Changing National Economic Performance in
Japan,” in Richard Nelson, Benn Steil, and David Victor, eds., Technological Innovation and Economic
Performance, Princeton University Press, 2002, pp. 74-111
Posen, Adam (2001b). “Japan 2001: Decisive Action or Financial Panic,” IIE Policy Brief 01-4, March
Posen, Adam (2001a). “Economic Viewpoint: Recognizing Japan’s Rising Potential Growth,” NIRA
Review, Winter.
Posen, Adam (2000). “The Political Economy of Deflationary Monetary Policy,” in Ryoichi Mikitani and
Adam S. Posen, eds., Japan’s Financial Crisis and its Parallels with U.S. Experience, IIE, 2000, pp. 194208
Posen, Adam (1999b). “Nothing to Fear but Fear (of Inflation) Itself,” IIE Policy Brief 99-9, November
Posen, Adam (1999a). “Implementing Japanese Recovery,” IIE Policy Brief 99-1, January
Posen, Adam (1998). Restoring Japan’s Economic Growth, Institute for International Economics.
Prince, Stephen (1999). The Warrior’s Camera: The Cinema of Akira Kurosawa. Princeton.
Richie, Donald (1998). The Films of Akira Kurosawa, 3rd edition. University of California.
Shimizu, Yoshinori (2000). “Convoy Regulation, Bank Management, and the Financial Crisis in Japan.”
In in Ryoichi Mikitani and Adam S. Posen, eds., Japan’s Financial Crisis and its Parallels with U.S.
Experience, IIE.
Svensson, Lars (2003). "Escaping from a Liquidity Trap and Deflation: The Foolproof Way and Others,"
Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 17(4), pages 145-166, Fall.
Tucker, Paul (2009). “Report to the Treasury Select Committee,” UK House of Commons, 18 March.
Ueda, Kazuo (2002). “The Transmission Mechanism of Monetary Policy near Zero Interest Rates: the
Japanese Experience,” in L. Mahadeva and P. Sinclair eds., Monetary Transmission Mechanism in
Diverse Economies, Cambridge University Press.
Ueda, Kazuo (2000). “Causes of Japan's Banking Problems in the 1990s,” T. Hoshi and H. Patrick eds.,
Crisis and Change in the Japanese Financial System, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2000
Ugai, H. (2006). “Effects of Quantitative Easing Policy: A Survey of Empirical Analyses,” Bank of
Japan Working Paper Series.

24

Figure 1: Annual Japanese GDP Growth
Official Recession Periods (a)

% change oya
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10

1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006
(a) Defined as two consecutive quarters of declining output
Source: Thompson DataStream

2008

Figure 2: Contributions to Japanese GDP Growth: 1991 Q1: 1999 Q2
Private consumption

Private Investment

Public Investment

Public Consumption

Net Exports

GDP
Percent

8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

Source: Cabinet Office Japan

25

1997

1998

1999

Figure 3: Contributions to Japanese GDP Growth: 2000 Q1 : 2008 Q2
Private consumption

Private Investment

Public Investment

Public Consumption

Net Exports

GDP
Percent
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Source: Cabinet Office Japan

Figure 4: Japanese Public Sector Stimulus: 1991 Q1: 1999 Q2
Public Investment

Public Consumption

T otal
Percent
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

Source: Cabinet Office Japan

26

1998

1999

Figure 5: Japanese Public Sector Stimulus: 2000 Q1 : 2008 Q2
Public Consumption

Public Investment

T otal
Percent
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
-0.8
-1.0
-1.2

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Source: Cabinet Office Japan

Figure 6: Japanese Banks’ Non-Performing Loan Problem
Index

NPLs as % total portfolio
10
9

Major Banks (lhs)
T opix Bank (rhs)

600

Regional Banks (lhs)

500

8
7

400

6
5

300

4
200

3
2

100

1
0
1999 2000

0
2001 2002

2003 2004

2005 2006

2007 2008

Source: Financial Services Agency Japan, T hompson Datastream

27

2009 2010

Figure 7: International TFP Growth

Germany

UK

US

J apan

France

4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
-1.0
-2.0
-3.0
-4.0
-5.0

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Source: Thompson DataStream and Bank calculations
Note: Simple TFP measure based on residual of GDP growth after accounting for growth in employment and capital and
movements in labor share

Figure 8: Average TFP Growth and GDP per worker: 2002 Q2: 2008 Q2

GDP

% Average
2

T FP

1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Japan

France

Germany

UK

US

Source: Thompson DataStream and Bank calculations
Note: Simple TFP measure based on residual of GDP growth after accounting for growth in employment and capital and
movements in labor share

28

Figure 9: The BoJ’s response to Japan’s recession
12
Call rate
10

"Normal" BOJ response
Fed counterfactual

Percent

8
6
4
2
0
1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

Source: Harrigan and Kuttner (2005)

Figure 10: Japan’s Inflation Experience 1992: 2008 Q2
Per cent
QEP period

7
6
5
4

Dome stic Corporate
Goods Price Inde x

3
2
1

CPI

0
-1
-2
-3

GDP de flator

-4
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

Source: Bank of Japan

29

2006

2007

2008

Figure 11: Quantitative Easing and Money Growth
% change oya

% change oya
200

40

UK narrow (LHS)
150

30
Japan narrow
(RHS)

100

20

50

10

0

0

-50

Japan broad (RHS)
UK broad (RHS)

-10

(a)

-100

-20

-150

-30
-24 -18 -12

-6

0

6

12

18

24

30

36

42

48

54

60

66

72

months from start of QE

Source: Bank of Japan and Bank of England
(a) Excluding intermediate OFCs

Figure 12: An Independent Central Bank and Expectations

Deflation scares

%
10
9
8
7

US 10Y Bond

6
5
4
3

JGB-10Y

2
Money Rate

1
0

1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
Source: T hompson DataStream and Bank calculations
Adapted from Kuttner and Posen (2003)

2003

30

2005

2007

Figure 13: Japanese Export Markets
% T otal Japanese Exports

60
50

Asia

40
Asia-ex mainland China
30
20

US

10
Mainland China
0
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
No te : As ia inc lude s Oc e a nia , Ho ng Ko ng a nd M a c a u
S o urc e : IM F Dire c tio n o f Tra de S ta tis tic s

Figure 14: UK Export Markets
% T otal UK Exports
70
European Union 27
60
50
Euro Area 16

40
30
20

US

10

European Union ex Euro Area
16

0
1998 1999

2000 2001

2002 2003

2004 2005

2006 2007

Source: IMF Direction of T rade Statistics

31

2008 2009

Figure 15: Structure of G7 Financial Markets
Canada

France

Germany

Italy

Japan

UK

US

Average

Stock Market Capitalisation
(a)

1.74

1.12

0.65

0.51

1.02

1.37

1.48

1.13

Private Sector Bond Market
(b)
Capitalisation

0.31

0.57

0.36

0.60

0.38

0.16

1.30

0.53

Short term Private Sector
(c)
Securities

0.11

0.22

0.21

0.01

0.07

0.16

0.26

0.15

Banking Sector
(d)
Capitalisation

1.41

1.21

1.20

1.27

1.51

1.90

0.69

1.31

Banking Sector
(e)
Concentration

0.57

0.55

0.74

0.40

0.54

0.72

0.35

0.55

2.95

7.90

22.60

12.49

6.66

8.50

31.70

13.26

Banks per Million Persons

(f)

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

As ratio of GDP. Data as of end 2008, Source: World Bank Financial Structure Dataset
As ratio of GDP. Data as of end 2008, Source: World Bank Financial Structure Dataset
As ratio of GDP. Data as of end 2008, Source: Bank Calculations and BIS
Deposit money bank assets as ratio of GDP. Data as of end 2008, Source World Bank Financial Dataset
Assets of three largest banks as share of assets of all commercial banks. Data as end of 2008, Source: World Bank
Financial Structure Dataset
Source: Bankscope, IMF and Bank Calculations

Figure 16: Japanese Financial Surpluses
Corporates

Government (a)

External

Households

Per cent of nominal GDP
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15

1992
1995
1998
2001
(a) Including public non financial corporations
Based on annual financial year data through 1998

2004

2007
Source: BoJ

32

Figure 17: UK and Japanese PNFC sector financial surpluses

Per cent of nominal GDP

10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10
-12

Japan

UK

1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008
J ap anes e d at a b as ed o n annual financial year d ata t hro ug h 19 9 8
So urce: Bo J and Bo E

Figure 18: UK and Japanese FDI outflows
Per Cent of nominal GDP
-30

U.K.

-25
-20
-15
-10

Japan
-5
0
1981

1984

1987

1990

1993

1996

1999

Source: OECD BoP Statistics

33

2002

2005

2008

