The Puzzle of UK Business Investment
Speech given by
Sir John Gieve, Deputy Governor, Bank of England

At the University of the West of England
26 September 2006

I am grateful to Lavan Mahadeva, Jumana Saleheen, Chris Shadforth and Nicola Dufty for their help
in preparing this speech. I would also like to thank Kate Barker, Charlie Bean, Martin Brooke, Andrew
Holder, and Andrew Wardlow for their helpful comments.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

2

Vice Chancellor, Ladies and Gentlemen, it is a great pleasure to be speaking to you this evening
at the University of the West of England.

The Bank's connection with this region has been a long one. Our Agents have been working
here since 1827, when the Bank first established a role in the regions to distribute banknotes and
gather intelligence about business and economic conditions.

A great deal has changed in Bristol and its economy since then. But we retain close links with
the area. Our Agent, Kevin Butler, and his deputy, Geoff Harding, meet up to 100 contacts a
month in order to chart economic developments in the South West. I know many of you are
involved in that process and I assure you that the insights you and others provide are an
important part of the MPC's monthly deliberations on interest rates. Thank you for your help.

I want to talk today about the current state of our economy and in particular to discuss the puzzle
of British investment.

The two are of course related. Investment is an important component of demand on our
economy’s resources, accounting for about a fifth of total demand. But it is also an important
determinant of supply. Investment adds to the capital stock which determines how much we can
produce. Provided it is well directed, the more we invest, the faster output can grow without
putting upwards pressure on inflation.

As far back as I can recall, governments and commentators have been concerned by the
relatively low level of investment in the United Kingdom. The 1960’s National Plan was
designed to raise it; all the parties in the fractious 1970s, when I started work in the Treasury,

3

saw it as a major drag on our growth and a reason for our lagging behind our competitors in
America and Europe. While the context has changed since then, low investment remains a
concern to this day. For example, in its most recent report on competitiveness, the DTI
concluded that “the UK still has low levels of business investment, which hinders productivity
and growth”.1 Chart 1 shows how investment rates for the UK have tended to be below those in
the US, France, Germany and Japan over recent years. Chart 2 shows how this is reflected in a
lower ratio of capital to output in the UK.

Chart 3 shows very clearly the booms and busts of the early 80s and early 90s. Twice business
investment seemed to take off only to collapse again as economic policy tightened. More
recently, in the late 1990s investment increased very sharply, especially in IT and
communications equipment. This was the time of the Dotcom boom and fears about the
millennium bug. When the boom burst and the millennium passed without disaster, investment
fell back in many countries, including the United Kingdom.

In the 1970s and 1980s, of course, it was natural to attribute the low levels of investment in the
United Kingdom, at least in part, to instability in the economy. With big fluctuations in inflation,
interest rates, exchange rates and growth, it did not seem surprising that businesses were wary of
investing heavily in long term capacity. Alongside microeconomic policies to encourage
investment, governments in those decades all wished to establish a stable pattern of growth and
inflation which would give business the confidence to invest.

And that brings me to the puzzle. Since 1992, when an explicit target for inflation was
introduced, the economy has been much less turbulent (Chart 4). To anyone, like me, who lived
through the booms and busts of the previous decades, this remarkable stability and steady growth
1

Page 15 of DTI ‘UK productivity and competitiveness indicators 2006’.

4

has looked like a golden age. In the last three years, with the UK having suffered less than most
economies from the post millennium hangover, we have been benefiting from the strong
recovery in the world economy. Yet in 2005, business spending on investment in the UK was at
its lowest relative to whole economy income since 1965, when official data were first collected2
(Chart 5). So what is going on?

As usual in economics, a number of explanations have been put forward – first of course the
figures may be misleading, second companies may be facing financial constraints or finding that
investment isn’t profitable enough in the UK, and third the rapid globalisation of the world’s
economy may be channelling investment elsewhere.

Measurement issues
There are a number of measurement problems and official data almost certainly are understating
actual spending on investment. In the summer the investment figures for past years were revised
up and it would be no surprise if there were further revisions to come. Second, the official
figures largely cover so-called tangible items, from the construction of factories, offices or shops
to the purchase of vehicles, computers and telecoms equipment. It includes only some spending
on intangibles and even those, notably software, are known to be under-recorded. Other
countries face similar measurement difficulties of course but to the extent that the UK economy
has a high service share in GDP, this factor may help to explain some of the gap.

I might add that the investment figures do not cover research and development or expenditure on
re-engineering business processes or investment in human capital, like staff training. But again
this is true internationally and I don’t think there is evidence that we are investing unusually

2

The original published version of the speech referred to 1967, which is when volumes data were first available.
Values data have been available from the ONS since 1965.

5

heavily in these areas – in fact management failures and poor skills and training are sometimes
cited as explanations of the low rate of investment.

Lastly, we need to look not just at what is spent on investment in cash but what it buys. The
price of many investment goods has been falling (Chart 6), so companies have been getting more
for their money. In particular, each new generation of IT is far more powerful than the last but it
is cheaper too. In other words, businesses in the United Kingdom have been keeping up the
volume of investment, but because of price falls, they haven’t had to spend so much.

But if the real level of investment has been higher than it appears in the UK, other countries too
have benefited from the global fall in the prices of capital goods. Indeed you might have
expected a fall in the relative cost of capital goods to lead to a larger increase in the volume of
investment.

So while the official figures may understate our level of investment, it seems unlikely that the
difficulties in measuring investment fully account for the relatively low rate of investment in the
UK.

Corporate finances and profitability
A second possible solution to our puzzle could be that either corporate finances have been
constrained or returns on investment have been inadequate.

Certainly the surge in investment in the late 1990s was funded in part by a sharp rise in corporate
debt which rose to record levels relative to corporate valuations. But since then, the corporate
sector has held spending in check, relative to profits. So by 2004, non financial corporations

6

enjoyed the largest financial surplus relative to GDP since 1969, and high surpluses have
continued since then (Chart 7).

One recent concern is that funds may have been diverted from investment to finance pension
fund deficits. In 2005, companies made one-off payments of almost £11 billion to reduce
pension deficits, five times more than payments in 2001. In a recent survey of Bank contacts
conducted by our Agents, we found little evidence of that in aggregate, although a fifth of small
firms expected there to be some impact on their investment plans. Moreover the strong overall
corporate financial position and the ready availability of lending should mean that one-off cash
flow pressures should not prevent the financing of productive investment. There is no shortage
of cash available to companies at the moment. Indeed the cost of borrowing has rarely been
lower.

One of the most striking features of the world economy in recent years has been the very low
rates of interest both in real and nominal terms. I don’t just mean short-term interest rates, but
also long-term bond yields. Some, including the Chairman of the Federal Reserve, Ben
Bernanke3, have attributed that to a global savings “glut”, which should stimulate investment.
But others, including the IMF4, suggest low interest rates actually reflect a lack of investment
opportunities across the world.5

So is the problem on the other side of the calculation – namely that UK investments do not offer
a high enough return? The evidence here is that, if anything, the achieved rate of return on
3

Bernanke, B (2005) ‘The global savings glut and the US current account deficit’ Remarks at the Homer Jones
lecture, St Loius Missouri.

4
5

IMF (2005) ‘Global imbalances: a saving and investment perspective’ Chapter 2 of the World Economic Outlook.

Of course the imbalances appear at different levels in different economies – our savings rate is currently 15% and
investment 17%; compare that with China where investment is around 40% and savings – mainly by households - is
several points higher.

7
investments in the United Kingdom has tended to be higher than in other advanced countries.6
That might indicate that the financial hurdle rate for UK investments has been higher than in
some other countries, which has choked off some investment. However, as the financial market
becomes increasingly global, I would expect any differences in national, risk adjusted hurdle
rates to disappear. As I have said, in recent years, it is not obvious that UK investment has been
depressed by a shortage of available funds.

Globalisation
Finally could globalisation have been depressing UK investment?

We frequently hear from

large businesses that they are rebalancing their investment programmes not just to take
advantage of lower costs abroad but to get closer to the strong growing economies in South East
Asia and elsewhere. And UK companies and investors do tend to be particularly outward
looking. Certainly, relative to other large advanced economies, the United Kingdom has a
disproportionately large stock of overseas investments.7

But we should bear in mind that globalisation has also created very lucrative opportunities in the
UK. Despite increased outsourcing of production, more people are employed in the UK
economy than ever before and some of our sectors – finance for example – have been expanding
rapidly as markets have become genuinely global. It is true that as a result of competitive
pressure, the manufacturing sector has continued to decline, relative to other sectors. But the
service sector has been thriving. It is often suggested that business investment will be depressed
as we move out of manufacturing and towards services. But that assumes that manufacturing is
more capital intensive than the service sector and the facts do not bear that out (Chart 8).
6

Citron, L and Walton, R, (2002) ‘International comparisons of company profitability’ ONS Economic Trends, No
587, October 2002
7

See for example, the statistics supplied by the United Nations Conference on Trade and development,
(http://www.unctad.org/Templates/Page.asp?intItemID=3277&lang=1) which shows that the UK stock of FDI was
equivalent to 65% of GDP in 2004, compared to an average of 27% for all developed economies.

8

Globalisation has also been a strong force driving inward investment in the UK. You may have
read that in 2005 we received more inward investment than any other country, including China
or the United States. Now our position was flattered by the inclusion of purchases of UK
companies by foreign companies and in the 2005 figures by the restructuring of Shell.
Nonetheless we were indeed the location for many greenfield investments.

Conclusions on investment
I confess I remain puzzled. The macro environment has never been more stable. Companies
have been achieving high rates of return on their investments in the United Kingdom, and
finance is readily available. For some years the UK has had a low capital stock per worker
relative to most similar economies and – in a truly global market – we might expect that gap to
narrow. It is difficult not to think that opportunities are there and in time we will see the long
awaited sustained recovery in investment.

9

Monetary policy
It is against that background that we have had an upturn in investment in the first half of this
year. Could that be the start of a long term increase? And what implications does that have for
monetary policy?

First, while investment offers the prospect of greater prosperity tomorrow, it is one source of
pressure on demand for resources today. So if we are to find room for more investment without
putting too much pressure on resources we will need to see a rebalancing of demand. On the
MPC we have only one instrument so we have to focus on the overall pressure of demand; we
cannot determine the balance between consumption and investment however desirable that may
be. The best we can do is to aim to keep inflation stable. In doing so we can reduce uncertainty
among decision makers in industry and services and allow them to focus on the big decisions
they need to make, without being misled by sharp changes in prices.

The stronger growth of investment in the first half of the year was one of the factors behind the
MPC’s decision to raise the Bank Rate by 25 basis points to 4.75%. I voted for that increase for
two main reasons. First, the accumulating news through the summer showed that the UK’s
recovery from the downturn in 2005 was well established and the doubts about that recovery had
been allayed. Second, with CPI inflation above target and with signs of inflation expectations
creeping up, I thought it was a good time to send a signal of our determination to bring inflation
back to target well in advance of the coming pay round.

As to the future, the central projection of inflation that we published in August showed it rising
at the end of this year and falling back to target by 2008, assuming that interest rates pick up to
5%. Most commentators are expecting us to raise rates again – probably in November, the next
month we revise our forecast.

10

But in practice the real world rarely does follow the central forecast precisely. There are many
uncertainties in the outlook – from the strength of the US economy as the housing market turns
down, to the future of oil prices, or at home, how the growth in the labour force will affect wages
and unemployment, and – as I have been discussing today – whether the recent upturn in
investment will persist. We will learn a little more on all these issues in the coming weeks and
months.

That is why, as Mervyn King has explained, the MPC makes its decisions one month at a time
and is therefore very wary of giving forecasts of our own future behaviour.

What we can commit to is doing whatever we can to maintain the remarkable period of economic
stability since inflation targeting was first adopted and to keep inflation low and close to 2%.
That is what we can do to provide an environment in which businesses will have confidence to
invest where they believe it will bring a return.
Chart 1:
Whole economy investment in different countries (nominal)
Per cent of GDP

40
35
30
25
20
15

UK
Germany
Japan

USA
France
Asia (newly industrialised)

10
5
0

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Source: IMF, September 2006 WEO

Chart 2: Capital Stock / GDP ratio (2002 prices)

2005

11

United Kindom = 100 in 1980
Germany

France

160
140

United States

120
100

United Kingdom

80
60
40
20
0

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Source: Groningen University Growth and Development Centre data set

12

Chart 3:
UK Business investment and GDP (chained volume measures)
Percentage changes on a year earlier
25
20

Business investment

15
10

GDP

5
0
-5
-10

1965

1975

1985

1995

Chart 4:
Macroeconomic Volatility in the UK (1976 – 2006)
Percentage points

3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0

1976

1986

1996

Rolling 10-year standard deviations of UK GDP growth
Sources: ONS and Bank of England

2006

2005

13

Chart 5:
UK Business investment
percentage of GDP
15

Nominal

10

Real

5

0
1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Chart 6:
The price of investment goods in the United Kingdom
Relative to the price of domestic output, 2003 = 100
200

150

100

50

0
1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

14

Chart 7:
UK Non-financial corporations’ financial balance (nominal)
Percent of GDP
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Chart 8:
Capital to output ratios in different sectors in the United Kingdom in 2004
All non-manufacturing
Other business activities
Financial
Transport and communication
Hotels and Restaurants
Distribution
Electricity gas and water
Manufacturing
0

100

200

300

400

manufacturing = 100

500

