The Financial Policy Committee at the Bank of England
Talk given by
Donald Kohn, External Member of the Financial Policy Committee, Bank of England

At the US Department of the Treasury Conference
2 December 2011

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

An important and interesting aspect of my post-Federal Reserve life has been my membership as an
“external” on the interim Financial Policy Committee at the Bank of England. And I thought this audience
might find it interesting to hear a little about the implementation of macroprudential policy in the United
Kingdom. We issued our third set of recommendations just yesterday, so this is a good time to discuss our
efforts to identify and deal with threats to financial and economic stability.

The Financial Policy Committee

I’ll begin with some background on the establishment of the interim Financial Policy Committee. As in many
places, the elected officials in the UK saw room for improvement in the performance of the various
authorities responsible for financial stability, both in the build up of vulnerabilities and the response to the
subsequent crisis. And they saw the shortfall as partly reflecting structural issues. In particular, the
separation of bank supervision from the central bank, which occurred in 1997 when the Bank of England was
given a clear price stability mandate and a greater degree of independence, seemed to impede the efficacy
of supervision and of crisis response. The Bank retained generalized responsibility for financial stability and
it published a much admired Financial Stability Report, but it did not directly participate in formulating and
implementing the supervisory policies to establish and protect financial stability, and so did not itself have the
levers to carry out its role effectively. The most obvious failing of the UK system, however, was that no
single institution had the responsibility, authority, or powers to monitor the system as a whole, identify
potentially destabilizing trends and respond to them with concerted action.

Shortly after the new government took office in the spring of 2010 it published a discussion draft of a new
structure that moved the regulation and supervision of individual firms back into the Bank of England.
Meanwhile the regulation of conduct within the financial system – including the conduct of firms towards their
retail customers and the conduct of participants in wholesale financial markets – is to be carried out by a
separate, dedicated, specialist body. To focus responsibility and accountability the Government has
proposed a new subsidiary of the Bank – the Prudential Regulatory Authority – that will concentrate on
microprudential oversight, while a new Financial Policy Committee will provide for the dedicated
macroprudential overlay. The law to implement this new structure is still under discussion, but in the
meantime the government has established an “Interim” Financial Policy Committee and given it two charges:
First, identify risks to financial stability in the UK and make recommendations to deal with those risks; most of
the recommendations are to financial institutions and Financial Services Authority, the FSA, which still has
the responsibility for oversight of financial institutions. Both the risk identification and the recommendations
are included in the Financial Stability Report, which is now the responsibility of the FPC.

Second, we are to make recommendations to the government about what tools we will need in the new law
to do our job. Ultimately, we are to have two kinds of powers with respect to tools. First to make
recommendations to the authorities where the FPC believes that specific regulatory actions are required in
order to protect financial stability. These recommendations are subject to consideration by the relevant
2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

2

authority and then to the usual rulemaking process if the authority decides to go forward. Second, if we see
the threat to stability as being immediate and serious, we will be able to issue directives to the
microprudential authorities on regulatory tools that should be deployed in the pursuit of macroprudential
policy.

The interim FPC has 11 members, including four externals serving on a part-time basis, and it is chaired by
the Governor; an observer from the Treasury also attends. The discussions have been vigorous and good
– a wide range of views are solicited and expressed about the risks to the financial system and what can be
done to ameliorate them. Meetings tend to focus on narrowing the number of issues and identifying the most
effective responses. We greatly benefit from the range of backgrounds members bring to the task. Two
members come from the FSA and are responsible for microprudential regulation and for implementing many
of our recommendations; several are from the financial stability side of the Bank with their macro-financial
perspective; several are macroeconomists who have dealt primarily with monetary policy issues and see the
relationships between developments in the financial sector and the real economy; and importantly two of my
fellow externals have quite extensive experience in the London financial markets, which they have utilized to
bring issues to our attention and to inform many of the rest of us without such experience how our concerns
are playing out in the “real world”.

I am going to concentrate on the leg of our mandate that asks us to identify risks and make
recommendations to preserve financial stability.

Risk Identification

Unfortunately, in one sense this hasn’t been difficult. The UK is part of Europe, even if it’s not part of the
euro area, and its banks and businesses are exposed to developments in the ongoing saga of the fiscal,
banking and business stresses so evident there. As a consequence, each time we met, we identified
exposure to these developments as the primary systemic risk to the U.K. financial system.

We are also building on a risk-identification structure already in place at the Bank of England. Staff provide
extensive briefings to FPC members in advance of our meetings. This includes information and analysis on
the macrofinancial environment and short- and medium-term risks to financial stability – both in the UK and
abroad in those markets in which UK banks are active. A key aspect of that analysis is the ability of the UK
banks to withstand potential adverse developments.

We review many different metrics and model outputs

within this process. In addition, the Bank has an active market intelligence function that produces reports on
what is going on in markets and the views of market participants about emerging risks. But of particular
value is that members bring their own knowledge and understanding of the UK financial and economic
system to the meetings. For myself, I make it a practice to talk to people in the financial sector on my visits
to London so I can learn first-hand what stability issues are on their minds.

3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

3

Recommendations

With very few exceptions, our recommendations have fallen into one of two broad categories. One category
encompasses acquiring additional information for ourselves and for the public that we believe is necessary
for the FPC and the markets to monitor and take actions to contain risks to financial stability. The second
category has been a series of recommendations to build additional resilience into the banking system without
impairing its willingness and ability to perform key intermediary functions, and in particular to supply credit to
UK households and small and medium-sized enterprises.

On the information side, we have identified several practices that raised questions about stability, but for
which we didn’t know enough to make a judgment and we asked the FSA to gather additional information.
One such practice involved complex funding structures, including those associated with synthetic ETFs and
collateral swaps. We were concerned about a potential build up in interconnections that were difficult to
understand, opaque to investors and counterparties, and therefore could contribute to mispriced risk and
instability in a stress situation. The FSA found that British banks were not active in this area, but it will be
important to monitor this sort of complex interconnection going forward to assure that the kinds of complex,
opaque funding structures that contributed to the buildup of risks and proved so fragile in the crisis do not
re-emerge.

We also have asked the FSA to look into loan forbearance and associated provisioning. By allowing both
borrowers and lenders additional flexibility to work through debt obligations during temporary periods of
stress, forbearance can be a stabilizing force for the economy and financial markets.

But loans that have

been subject to forbearance are also inevitably subject to greater risk than loans that did not need special
treatment. If those risks are not adequately provisioned for, banks are in effect not as resilient as they might
appear from their published capital ratios and balance sheets. The FSA had already looked into forbearance
in residential real estate, but we asked that this work be extended to UK banks’ household and corporate
sector exposures on a global basis. Initial results for the UK commercial real estate sector indicated some
under provisioning, but not enough to constitute a systemic risk. Under a risk-based approach, more work
will be done on global exposures.

We also asked that the banks publish additional information so that private parties can better judge the
safety and soundness of UK bank counterparties, increasing the role of market discipline in maintaining
financial stability. As a generalization, UK banks are not as transparent as those in the US - for example
complete reports are published semi-annually, not quarterly, and the published reports are just for one day,
with very little if any information about intra period balance sheets. So one recommendation to the FSA has
been to work with the British Bankers Association to increase the transparency of UK banks along a number
of dimensions; this is an ongoing project we shall be returning to periodically.

4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

4

Last June we were especially focused on European sovereign exposures and the just completed EBA stress
tests. Uncertainty among those extending credit to banks about such exposures could undermine financial
stability by inducing a generalized reluctance to fund UK banks in response to the threatening situation in the
euro area. We asked the FSA to ensure that the exposures of individual major UK banks were released to
the public and we asked the FSA to look at, and publish aggregate information on, exposures of the banks
below the few largest. The publication of the requested information did occur and for the banks below the
top few, it showed that euro area exposures were quite limited.

Just yesterday we recommended that the publication of leverage ratios be accelerated from 2015 as required
under the Basel 3 guidelines to no later than the beginning of 2013. Widely varying applications of risk
weights distort comparisons across banks and have the potential to reduce public confidence in the
information content of capital ratios that use risk-weighted assets in the denominator. Leverage ratios, which
weigh all assets equally, are imperfect metrics for resilience, but they can be valuable supplements to
supposedly more sophisticated measurements; the sharp rise in such ratios before the crisis at a number of
institutions were a warning sign of vulnerability. We expect that the additional public information about over
all leverage will help counterparties evaluate risk, bolster market discipline, and provide greater incentive for
UK banks to raise capital and constrain leverage.

The second category of recommendations has focused on building bank resilience, especially in light of the
growing risks from the euro area. It is critically important that banks not try to bolster their own individual
strength by reducing the availability of credit to UK businesses or households, even in periods of stress.
Although a definitive parsing of weakness in credit growth between supply and demand is never really
possible, credit availability is seen as somewhat constrained in the UK, especially for small and medium-size
businesses, and further restraint would tend to weaken an already slow recovery, feeding back on the
banking system. The best way to build resilience while maintaining lending is to increase the level of capital
– and that has been a main objective of the FPC. In June and September we advised the banks to take
advantage of any opportunities to increase capital in periods of strong profitability by retaining those earnings
and not distributing them in dividends or additional compensation, and to reduce distributions when earnings
fell short. We asked the FSA to work with banks on the follow through to this recommendation.

When we met a week ago, we recognized that the threat from the problems in the euro area had intensified
and as a consequence so had the need for an ample capital cushion. At the same time, a variety of forces
had weakened the growth of bank earnings, which consequently had been inadequate to build any extra
cushion. One of the effects of the increased threat relative to the level of capital had been a rise in funding
costs for UK banks and reduction in availability, especially at longer tenors. Those funding constraints could
well begin to feed through to the cost and availability of credit to households and businesses. Consequently
we strengthened our recommendation to the banks to say that “if earnings are insufficient to build capital
levels further, banks should limit distributions and give serious consideration to raising external capital in

5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

5

coming months.” The FSA will carry this message to the banks in coming weeks as it reviews banks plans
for compensation and dividends, and as it assesses the adequacy of their capital plans.

In addition to building capital levels, banks can take steps to manage their balance sheets to increase
resilience without reducing critical lending and other activities. In September and again yesterday, the FPC
advised the FSA to work with banks to identify such opportunities to strengthen balance sheet resiliency
without exacerbating market fragility or reducing lending to the real economy.

On the liability side of the balance sheet this entails obtaining term funding whenever possible and reducing
reliance on short-term wholesale funding sources that are subject to being cut off suddenly were
counterparties to become concerned about the creditworthiness of the borrower or indeed about their own
vulnerability so they begin to hoard liquidity in even safer forms.

As we saw in 2008, even secured

short-term funding is vulnerable when confidence is undermined.

Among assets, intra financial sector claims could be a channel for contagion when counterparties get in
trouble and reductions in some of these claims might also free up capital for lending to nonfinancial
counterparties to support the economy. At the same time, we need to recognize that borrowing and lending
among financial institutions can perform valuable economic functions in supporting real economy lending by
smoothing the availability of funds to lenders and redistributing savings from lenders with a surplus to those
facing stronger loan demands and who can use the funds more productively. The FPC has identified for
further examination the role of different kinds of intra financial sector transactions in financial and economic
stability. Among other things, the financial stability perspective – the externalities of individual
transactions - may imply different risk weights for capital requirements than those derived from
microprudential considerations.

Countercyclical Macroprudential policy.

Much has been written and analyzed about the challenges of conducting macroprudential policy in good
times – taking away the prudential punch bowl as the party gets going. The earnings and capital of
institutions will look strong; borrowers will be in good financial shape even after they have increased their use
of credit; asset mispricing will be difficult to identify and will entail overriding market judgments; vested
interests in the private sector and at the intersection of the private and public sectors will be resistant to
change; and it will be difficult to convince even dedicated and dispassionate elected representatives that the
good times can’t go on forever – or at least until after the next election. It won’t be easy, but in my view the
widespread awareness of these problems along with the memory of the very tough times we are now
experiencing because of past credit excesses will make it reasonably likely that the authorities will do the
right thing under these circumstances.

6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

6

The other side of countercyclical policy – easing when times become tough – confronts a different and
perhaps more difficult set of challenges. When the economy is weakening and bad debts are building,
easing requirements may reduce the effect of financial sector problems on the real economy. But how do
you know the problems won’t get much worse, perhaps for reasons entirely external to the economy in
question and out of control of the authorities. If conditions do continue to deteriorate substantially, releasing
capital and liquidity buffers – lowering requirements – could come back to haunt the economy and the
authorities if it results in widespread failures, unemployment as credit tightens, and if it comes to require
fiscal action to stem the downward slide. The FPC has faced just such an issue as the situation in the euro
area worsened last summer and fall, and its discussion of the conflicting pressures is reflected in the record
of our September meeting, already published. The committee concluded that lowering buffers would not be
appropriate at that time, out of concern about what might be coming next.

The cost of leaning unnecessarily hard against expanding credit and rising asset prices would be growth and
innovation foregone – very hard to see. The cost of inadequate capital and liquidity is large and visible – a
loss of confidence and an unstable financial system. A risk averse, or even a risk neutral, macroprudential
regulator will find it more comfortable to take away the punch bowl in good times than to spike in bad times.
We need more thought and research about appropriate countercyclical policies in tough times.

Conclusions

Although forms of macroprudential policies have been practiced for many years in a number of countries, the
consistent and systematic application of this perspective to highly sophisticated globally integrated markets
and institutions as is now being undertaken in the UK, US, and other advanced economies is in its infancy.
I’ve drawn a couple of conclusions from my experiences in this new endeavor.

1.

It’s no accident that many of the FPC’s recommendations have centered on information. The

authorities can’t conduct macroprudential policy and the markets can’t reinforce the efforts of the authorities
without detailed knowledge of key elements of the financial markets and their interrelationships. The work of
the Office of Financial Research and of the researchers at this conference is essential to establishing and
preserving financial stability. It is necessary, but it is not sufficient. That information and analysis must feed
into an open and inclusive process that brings a wide variety of experience and judgment to bear. We are
all learning from each other.

2.

Building additional resilience into the system in difficult times without impeding the flow of credit to

households and businesses is hard. It will be at just those times that resilience is most needed, but also
when earnings are likely to be low and capital markets expensive to access. Surely the solution is to require
high levels of capital and liquidity before trouble hits, so bad times are much less likely to call the viability of
financial institutions into question. Unfortunately, the current threats to financial stability are occurring while
the transition to this stronger regime is underway, but not yet complete.
7

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

7

3.

Countercyclical macroprudential policy is challenging. This is true in good times when it appears the

system is strong and there will resistance to damping the upswing. But it may be even more difficult to allow
or even encourage drawing down of capital and liquidity buffers in bad times to reduce the potential for
tightening credit conditions to feed weakening economic trends. This problem illustrates nicely the different
perspectives of macro- and micro-prudential regulation. From a micro perspective, conserving capital and
liquidity by reducing lending and being tough on restructuring troubled credits under such circumstances
strengthens the bank and helps to keep it from failing. From a macro perspective, however, those actions
will tend to activate an adverse feedback loop between the financial sector and the real economy that will
weaken both. Congruence between micro and macro considerations requires that financial institutions have
high levels of capital and liquidity before trouble hits.

8

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

8

