Bank of England

Page 1

Appendix: PRA initiatives to strengthen the regulatory foundations of competitiveness and growth
Harness the UK’s strengths as a global
financial centre

Maintain trust in the UK as a place to do
business

Tailor regulation to the UK

Working with HMT to facilitate responsible
openness, e.g. through trade agreements,
equivalence assessments and the Gibraltar
Authorisations Regime.

Implementing Basel 3.1 to align with
international standards.

Tailoring Basel 3.1 where appropriate to UK
circumstances.

Implementing other international
standards for banks and insurers.

Updating the PRA Rulebook to remove
unnecessary requirements including EU
non-performing loan rules.

Ensuring responsible openness by maintain
cooperative relationships with supervisors in
other jurisdictions supported by a growing
number of Memoranda of Understanding
(MoUs).

Continuing to play a leading role in
influencing international regulatory
standards and participating actively in
global standard-setting bodies. These
include the Basel Committee for Banking
Enhancing the PRA’s approach to
Supervision (BCBS) and the International
authorising and supervising branches of Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS),
third country insurers and banks
which will be consulting later this year on an
International Capital Standard (ICS) for
Reforming rules on remuneration, including internationally active insurance groups.
limits on the ratio of variable to fixed
remuneration (‘the bonus cap’).

Waiving application of liquidity requirements
at the level of an individual firm and
permitting a firm to form a Domestic
Liquidity Sub-Group (DolSub liquidity
waiver).
Working with HMT on Solvency II reforms
to further increase proportionality and
streamline aspects of the regime in ways
that were previously not possible.

Bank of England

Page 2

Developing a safe and pragmatic approach
to regulating the use of AI and machine
learning in UK financial services.

Working with Government and FCA, looking
at opportunities to reform the SMCR while
maintaining its core purpose.

Developing an approach to prudential
regulation of novel digital assets including
stablecoins.

Simplifying capital, liquidity and operational
requirements for smaller banks and building
societies (‘Strong and Simple’).

Developing a prudent approach to
operational resilience and Critical Third
Parties that maintains responsible
openness.

Streamlining excessive reporting
requirements for insurers and banks.

With HMT and the FCA, working towards
recognition of STS (Simple, Transparent
and Standardised) equivalent non-UK
securitisations, thereby increasing choice
for UK investors in the market for STS
securitisations.
Implementing a more flexible approach to
Insurance Linked Securities.
Finalising policy on model risk
management.
Thematic review of risk management in
bulk purchase annuity (BPA) deals.
Ensuring that UK banks and insurance
companies are prepared for climate
change and able to play their part in

Launching a competitiveness conference
to explore the links between prudential
regulation, international competitiveness,
and growth.

Bank of England

supporting the transition to net-zero,
including through the work of the Climate
Financial Risk Forum.
Enhancing accessibility of rules and
regulations by improving the clarity of the
PRA Rulebook and by creating a more
user-friendly website.
Participating in the Regulatory Initiatives
Forum to publish the Regulatory Initiatives
Grid and share information between
regulators about the timing and operational
impact of regulatory initiatives.
Strengthening consultation and
engagement processes, including setting
up an external Cost-Benefit Analysis Panel.
Consulting on the PRA’s approach to
policy after the FSM Bill is enacted,
following on from PRA Discussion Paper
4/22 – ‘The Prudential Regulation
Authority’s approach to policy’, September
2022.
Engaging with firms on reforms to data
collection as part of the Bank’s
Transforming Data Collection
Programme.

Page 3

