Bank of England

Page 1

The Digital Pound − speech
by Jon Cunliffe
Given at UK Finance
07 February 2023

Bank of England

Page 2

Speech
As some of you may have seen, the Bank of England and the Treasury have today
published, as a Consultation Paper, the report of the Bank of England – HM Treasury
Taskforce on the introduction in the UK of a central bank digital currency – a ‘digital
pound’. So I am grateful for the opportunity today to set out some of the thinking behind
the report and the next steps we propose.
First, however, I should set out the headline conclusions of the Taskforce.
Our assessment is that on current trends it is likely that a retail, general purpose digital
central bank currency - a digital pound – will be needed in the UK. This would be a new,
digital form of money, issued by the Bank of England for use by households and
businesses for everyday payments.
A digital pound would be a very substantial financial infrastructure project that would take
several years to complete. It would, as many in this audience know, have major
implications for the way we transact with each other and, more broadly, for the financial
sector and the economy in general. The Taskforce’s conclusion is that we are not yet at a
point where a firm decision can be made to implement a digital pound.
However, in view of the likely need and the lead time to introduction, the Bank and The
Treasury, will now proceed to the next stage of detailed policy and technical development
of the digital pound - including the development of a technical blueprint.
This stage will take around two to three years following which a decision will be made
whether or not to proceed to the next stage and implement a digital pound in the UK. The
work over the next two to three years will inform that decision and will reduce the lead time
to launch should the decision at the end of this stage be to implement the digital pound in
the UK, which could then be introduced in the second half of the decade.
In this next stage of detailed policy and technical work, including the development of a
technical blueprint for the chosen model of the digital pound, we will work closely with
private sector partners on proofs of concept, experimentation as well as on the
development of the blueprint itself. We expect that this research and development work
will have important benefits for both the Bank and the fintech industry even if the eventual
decision is not to introduce a digital pound.
In order to proceed to the next stage, we need clarity about the model of a digital pound to
be developed. The report published today sets out for consultation the key features of the
model we propose to take forward. The report is accompanied by a Technology Working

Bank of England

Page 3

Paper that sets out an accompanying illustrative conceptual model and seeks feedback on
potential approaches to key technology considerations.
Before I set this out in further detail, there is one important point I should make. Given all
the attention that the cryptoasset world, with its attendant gyrations and failures, has
received in recent years, it is perhaps understandable, that the digital pound can be
confused in peoples' minds with cryptoassets such as bitcoin. I should take this opportunity
to correct this misapprehension. Indeed, nothing could be further from the truth.
The majority of cryptoassets are highly speculative assets, whose value is extremely
volatile, because there is nothing behind them. They have no intrinsic value. For that
reason, they are not suitable and not used for general payment purposes. One can think of
them as more akin to a bet than to trusted money. The digital pound would be a safe,
trusted form of money accepted for everyday transactions by households and firms, in the
same way as Bank of England notes are today. It is of course possible that some of the
technologies developed in the crypto world might be useful in the development of a digital
pound, but as I will explain later, there is a large range of technologies that are now under
consideration.
Why is a digital pound likely to be needed?
There are a number of considerations behind our assessment that a digital pound is likely
to be needed. The assessment is forward looking. It turns first on current trends in the
way we use money to make payments and the potential of emerging digital technologies
and second on the public policy response necessary to ensure innovation and competition
can flourish without jeopardising the safety and uniformity of the money we use in the UK.
Money is at its root a social convention1 based on trust that allows us to store, transfer and
settle obligations we hold on each other in society. It’s safe and efficient operation is, as
history has demonstrated, fundamental to social and economic stability. The forms that
money takes and the ways it is used have changed throughout history driven by changes
in technology and the changing demands of ever more sophisticated and complex
economies. However, trust in money is the bedrock on which that innovation is built.
Two forms of money are currently available to the public2 throughout the UK. The Bank of
England and the Royal Mint issue a physical form of money to the public – bank notes and

1

To function money relies on a shared understanding that the relevant instrument can be used to calibrate, exchange,
store and settle claims. For further discussion on this point see recent speeches ‘It’s Time to Talk about Money’ (2020)
and ‘Do We Need Public Money (2021)’.
2 The Bank of England also issues reserves to financial institutions. This is a form of wholesale money that allows
regulated firms to hold claims on the Bank of England.

Bank of England

Page 4

coins, otherwise known as ‘cash’. Private commercial banks issue predominantly digital
money in the form of electronic transfers between bank deposit accounts3.
We have seen major changes in recent years in the form of use of money to make
payments. In the mid-1960s, most workers were paid weekly in cash, and around 70% of
the population did not have a bank account.4 Very few had access to credit or debit cards.
Consequently, for every £100 of funds that people held to make payments, over a third
would be held as cash. Nowadays, less than 5% is held as cash. Even 15 years ago, 60%
of transactions in the UK used physical cash; pretty much everyone in this room would
have carried enough for everyday transactions.
In 2021 only 15% of transactions involved physical money. Technology and the increasing
digitalisation of everyday life has transformed the way we use money. Private commercial
bank money accounted for 85% of the payments made by the public. Within that, debit
and credit card transactions accounted for 69% of transactions. Contactless payment has
made such transactions much easier for everyday life. And the growth of internet
commerce has required the use of digital money.
It is always challenging to forecast how technological advances and social trends will play
out. Few at the turn of this century would have predicted the development and growth of a
massive and dominant market and social platforms. Or how the advances in the
functionality of the smartphone, as most recently seen during the pandemic, would
transform daily lives.
But while we cannot know with certainty how current trends in payments and technology
will play out, it would be complacent to assume that developments in money and payments
will end with the status quo.
There are already in existence new digital technologies that are being applied to the digital
representation, transfer and storing of money like obligations. These offer the prospect of
new possibilities in the way money and payments can be configured to interact with digital
processes. Programmable money, for example, could enable the development of smart
contracts which carry out specific actions based on pre-defined actions and conditions5.
Moreover, money and payments are no longer the exclusive province of banks. New,
non-bank players have already been successful in providing innovative payment services.
Looking forward a wide range of non-bank payment firms, including bigtechs and some

3

Only the Bank of England issues banknotes in England and Wales, but six banks in Scotland and Northern Ireland also
issue banknotes, backed largely by assets at the Bank of England. See Scottish and Northern Ireland banknotes |
Bank of England and the Scottish and Northern Irish Banknotes Regulations (2009) for further details.
4 The Payments of Wages Act 1960, as amended by the Truck Act.
5 Some examples of programmable functionality might include: instantaneous currency exchanges with reduced
settlement risk; more efficient real estate purchases whereby all parties’ transactions are executed simultaneously by a
smart contract; or an automated payment made by a vehicle at a toll booth.

Bank of England

Page 5

players from the crypto universe, are becoming increasingly interested in the possibilities
of these new technologies in money and payments.
Our assessment that a digital pound is likely to be needed is grounded first in the view that
further decline in cash use and further development in the digitalisation of money and
payments is likely and second in the view that these developments raise important
questions to which the Bank of England and the Government should respond.
As far as the decline of cash is concerned, the immediate response is to make sure cash
will remain available to any and all that want to use it. The Bank has made clear that we
will continue to produce it and the Government is taking powers under the Financial
Services and Markets Bill to give the Bank of England and FCA new powers to ensure the
future effectiveness, resilience, and sustainability of the cash ecosystem6.
However, we cannot ignore the fact that the safest form of money, ‘public’ money, that it is
to say money issued by the state for general use, will become increasingly less useful and
useable and of shrinking relevance to a large part of the population. Nor can we ignore
the likelihood that we will see the emergence of new forms of money, offering new
possibilities and issued by new as well as established players.
This raises, particularly for the Bank of England, the question of how we can continue to
ensure that all of the types of money used in the UK are denominated in Sterling, remain
safe and that each is interchangeable on demand and to all of the other types of money
without loss of value, including publicly issued, Bank of England money.
We ensure trust in money at present by regulation of the commercial banks that issue
money, by requiring banks to settle amongst themselves in Bank of England money (i.e.
Bank of England reserves) and, crucially, by requiring all private money to be
exchangeable for Bank of England money, cash, on demand by the holder and without
loss of value. Alongside regulation, the provision of Bank of England money to the public
and reserve money to commercial banks institutions anchors the confidence, uniformity
and interchangeability of money in the UK. Our assessment is that future developments in
payments and money will make it likely that, alongside regulation, we will in future need a
digital pound, issued by the Bank of England to perform this anchor function.
The experience of digitalisation is that new products and services, enabled by new
technology, can be adopted rapidly at scale. The Government has identified several
characteristics of digital markets that may lead to concentration. Such characteristics
include network effects, economies of scale and scope and data advantages, which can

6

Financial Services and Markets Bill (2023). In December 2022, the Bank of England published a consultation,
closing on 10 February, setting how it intends to use these new powers.

Bank of England

Page 6

act as barriers to entry. This suggests that the future development of private money
issuance could tend towards a small number of firms taking a significant market share.
While concentration and market power are not inherently harmful and may reflect
innovative products and services, they can damage consumer choice, competition and
innovation. Dominant issuers of new forms of private digital money may create ‘walled
gardens’ - payment systems that are not fully interoperable or restrict the development by
smaller firms of payment services using the money they issue.
A digital pound issued by the Bank of England would provide an alternative, public, digital
money - an open platform, which would be available to all developers of new digital
payment services. Moreover, if designed appropriately, a digital pound could complement
and support new forms of private digital money and payment services, for example by
acting as the ‘bridging asset’ between different platforms enabling convertibility. By
establishing technical standards available to all, it could help ensure interoperability
between different platforms. Our assessment is that a digital pound, an alternative,
publicly issued form of digital money, available to all, would help ensure competition and
innovation and drive efficiency in payments.
There are other important potential benefits. There is scope for innovation to generate
further efficiencies in payments, allowing for faster and/or cheaper payments. That
improvement might be facilitated by new technologies and new entrants to payments
markets offering new functionalities. For example, small and medium-sized merchants pay
far higher fees for accepting card payments than larger businesses7. Although these costs
are not paid directly by customers, they may feed into higher prices in the economy
overall. And cross-border transactions in particular are often very costly. The average cost
of a payment sent to another country is about 6% of the value sent8.
The digital pound could also complement existing financial inclusion initiatives, for example
if it were able to provide for offline payments. It could, with international co-operation,
present an opportunity to improve cross-border payments. And, by providing a highly
resilient, alternative payment rail it could reinforce the overall resilience of the UK
payments system. These motivations are explored more fully in the paper we have
published today.
The Model for a Digital pound
Our assessment, therefore is that on current trends a digital pound would have benefits
and is likely to be needed. However, the Taskforce concluded, that we are not at present
at a point at which a firm decision could be taken to implement the digital pound. Further

7
8

See for example Haldane, A.: ‘Seizing the Opportunities from Digital Finance’ (2020).
World Bank (2022) – Remittances Prices Worldwide Quarterly.

Bank of England

Page 7

work, especially detailed technical exploration and development is necessary to assess
the feasibility and cost of what would be a very major public, financial infrastructure
project.
We expect this intensive exploration and technical development phase to take around
three years. It will produce a technical blueprint for the digital pound. The work will not
delay but rather shorten the lead time to actual launch should a firm decision be taken in
the future to implement the digital pound so that a digital pound could be introduced in the
second half of the decade. And during this next phase, we will be able to see more
evidence of how the current trends and changes in payments and money are playing out
which will help to inform a future decision.
In order to proceed to the next phase we need clarity about the model of the digital pound
we wish to develop. We have today set out that model in detail for consultation. We are
seeking industry and public views on the key design choices that determine the model.
The Consultation Paper is accompanied by a Technical paper which sets out our current
thinking on the relevant technology and seeks feedback on the approaches we propose to
consider.
There is not time today to go through the model in detail, but I will briefly set out some of
the most important details of what we propose.
We envisage the digital pound as a partnership with the private sector. The Bank would
provide the digital pound and the central infrastructure, including the ‘core ledger’. Private
sector firms – which could be banks or approved non-bank firms – would provide the
interface between the Bank’s central infrastructure and users by offering wallets and
payment services. These private companies would be able to integrate the digital pound,
as the settlement asset, into the services they would offer to wallet holders.
The wallets would be operated on a ‘pass-through’ basis. That is to say, they would not
constitute a claim on the wallet provider in the way that a bank account is a claim on a
bank. Nor would they represent a custody arrangement. Rather, the wallets would hold all
of the customer related information and ‘pass-through’ the customers instructions to the
Bank’s infrastructure. All of the digital pounds would be held on the Bank of England’s
central ledger.
Privacy has been a major theme of the Taskforce’s engagement with industry and the
public. We intend that the digital pound would have the same (or stronger) privacy
protections as bank accounts, debit cards or cheques which are now used for 85% of
transactions in the economy.
Individuals’ personal details and transaction records would be known only to their private
sector wallet provider in the same way they are for bank account providers today (and

Bank of England

Page 8

subject to the same privacy protections). But individuals’ details and records would not be
known by the Government or the Bank of England. In this way, the digital pound would
provide privacy while also protecting against fraud and financial crime.
The digital pound would not be an anonymous bearer instrument like cash, but physical
cash would remain available to those who wanted to use it.
Neither the Government nor the Bank would program a digital pound or restrict how it was
spent. Instead, the Bank would provide the infrastructure and minimum functionality for the
private sector to provide programmability features for users. Those features would require
user consent.
As with banknotes and many current accounts, no interest would be paid on a digital
pound. Its purpose would be as a means of transaction -- to make and receive payments rather than as a savings product. Nor do we see the digital pound as a monetary policy
instrument and as such it would, like cash, have neither positive nor negative
remuneration.
In our 2021 Discussion Paper on ‘New Forms of Digital Money’, we explored the financial
stability risks and impact on the banking sector of the emergence of non-bank digital
monies. Modelling of an illustrative scenario suggested that retail deposit outflows into
digital money would affect banks’ funding and could lead to higher bank lending rates,
although the impact was expected to be modest. This modelling was based on
assumptions, set to be highly cautious9, about the amount of non- bank digital money
households and businesses might want to hold and hence the scale of possible outflows
from retail bank deposits.
We cannot, of course, know ex ante, how households and businesses would respond to a
digital pound and how much they would want to hold. We therefore propose that to
manage financial stability risks, initially at any rate, the digital pound would need to be
designed in a way that enabled some restrictions to be placed on amount an individual or
business could hold.
We propose a limit of between £10,000 and £20,000 per individual as the appropriate
balance between managing risks and supporting wide usability of the digital pound. A limit
of £10,000 would mean that three quarters of people could receive their pay in digital
pounds, while a £20,000 limit would allow almost everyone to receive their pay in digital

9

The Illustrative Scenario assumed demand for the digital pound was around 20% of retail and business deposits, which
was equivalent to nearly all transactional deposits in the banking system. This assumption is particularly cautious for
higher interest rate environments when deposits would be expected to pay holders somewhat more interest than an
(unremunerated) digital pound.

Bank of England

Page 9

pounds10, keeping outflows from the banking system broadly within the assumptions set
out in the Bank’s earlier modelling work.
We are, as I have said, also seeking feedback on the technical approaches for such a
model of the digital pound. The Technology Working Paper accompanying the
Consultation Paper sets out an illustrative and complementary conceptual model
consisting of a core ledger, API layer, analytics and alias service. The core ledger
operated by the Bank might be centralised, running as a traditional database, or it might
use Distributed Ledger Technology (whether a blockchain or another form of the
technology).
The paper includes key questions which will be further explored in the next phase of work,
including for example which privacy-enhancing technologies might support our policy
objectives and what features of an API for the digital pound would best enable innovative
use cases.
The Digital pound within a digital payments landscape
Finally, I want to cover briefly how a retail digital pound, designed for use by firms and
households in everyday transactions, might sit alongside a wholesale central bank digital
currency, privately issued digital money, and also alongside central bank digital currencies
issued by other jurisdictions.
On the question of a ‘wholesale CBDC’ the first point to emphasise is that for the Bank this
is not a question of either one or the other of ‘retail or wholesale’. We are working
extensively on both areas, including through the renewal of the digital infrastructure we
currently use to provide money to commercial banks in the form of Bank of England
reserves.
Many of the technologies which I referred to above offer the potential for wholesale
financial transactions to take place at lower cost, higher speed and with greater resilience.
In many cases the same considerations around the potential benefits of new technological
approaches, for example the deployment of smart contracts, atomic settlement or potential
resilience benefits, apply to the wholesale world.
However, wholesale markets differ from retail in several respects and a digital pound
designed for everyday use may not be best suited for wholesale financial markets. Our
view is that for such markets there are other routes that might more quickly and effectively
allow for new forms of digital representation, the ‘tokenisation’, of central bank money to
be used in financial transactions.

10

Specifically, a limit of £10,000 would allow 75% of UK income earners to hold their salary, pre-existing balances as
well as an illustrative 10% bonus or overtime payment.

Bank of England

Page 10

There is now a great deal of experimentation in this area among central banks, including
the Bank of England, and within the private sector. Some of the approaches proposed
would involve a greater role for the private sector, particularly the large financial firms that
already have access to a form of digital Bank of England money, in the tokenisation and
transfer of central bank money including between currencies11. Other experiments are
testing the feasibility of networks of central bank digital currency systems for cross border
wholesale transactions12.
The Bank is looking particularly at how we can exploit the capabilities of the new RTGS
system we are building, with the new core RTGS settlement engine launching in 2024. We
are examining features that could make it easier to connect to the RTGS service, including
a broader range of APIs, improved availability, with near 24/7 operation and
synchronisation of the RTGS system with other ledgers including those using distributed
ledger technology and tokenisation of assets13.
At the same time, the Bank of England is working with the FCA and HMT to establish a
sandbox to explore innovative forms of digital settlement of wholesale financial market
transactions. We are also actively engaged with the work of the BIS Innovation Hub,
including through its London Centre, at experiments to look at the potential for improved
settlement.
All of this work will proceed alongside the next phase of development of the retail digital
pound. We envisage that much of the technical work in this phase will provide insights
that will be of significant value to our work on the future digitalisation of wholesale financial
markets.
The further development of the digital pound will also benefit the Bank’s work on private
sector stablecoins14. The Financial Services and Markets Bill (2023) provides powers for
the Bank of England to regulate stablecoins used in systemic payment systems in the UK.
As with wholesale CBDC, this is not a question of whether we have a digital pound issued
by the Bank of England or private sector stablecoins issued by private sector firms. In a
future payments landscape, there could be opportunities for privately issued stablecoins,
regulated to the same standards as we regulate other forms of privately issued money.

11

See for example the work the Bank of England has done with regard to omnibus accounts.
See for example BIS Innovation Hub projects looking at this topic - such as mBridge, Icebreaker, Dunbar and Jura.
13 Last year the Bank set out its thinking and approach on many of these elements through a consultation on the
roadmap for RTGS beyond 2024. See also The road to enhanced payments - speech by Victoria Cleland | Bank of
England. As noted, this effort is complemented by work ongoing at the BIS Innovation Hub London Centre to look at the
potential benefits from synchronisation under Project Meridian.
14 See Bank of England: ‘New Forms of Digital Money (2021)’ - Stablecoins are cryptoassets that aim to reduce volatility
by pegging their value to government-sponsored – or ‘fiat’ – currencies.
12

Bank of England

Page 11

We envisage that these could operate alongside the digital pound and alongside
commercial bank money and cash. The digital pound could act as a bridging asset
between different types of privately issued digital money and establish standards for
interoperability. And, crucially, the requirement for privately issued digital money to be
exchangeable on demand and at par for Bank of England digital pounds would help secure
the interchangeability and uniformity of money in the UK.
Finally, many central banks, across the globe are exploring the issuance of a central bank
digital currency for both retail and wholesale purposes. A few have now been launched 15.
There is clearly a great opportunity and a great need for international cooperation in this
area. Interoperability between national and regional central bank digital currencies could
bring substantial benefits by reducing the cost and frictions in cross border payments. At
the same time, there are broader macro-economic and geopolitical issues that need to be
considered.
The Bank of England is working actively on these issues with international counterparts
through the Bank for International Settlements Committee on Payments and Market
Infrastructures (CPMI), through the G7, the G20 and FSB and through close cooperation
with a small group of advanced economy central banks16.
Conclusion
To conclude, the Consultation Paper and accompanying Technology Working Paper
marks the end of the first stage of the work of the Bank of England – HM Treasury
Taskforce. It sets out: our assessment that a digital pound issued by the Bank of England
is likely to be needed; the next phase of work necessary to enable a firm decision to be
taken in the future on whether to implement the digital pound; and consults on the model
we now propose to develop.
The consultation will run for four months and end on the 7th June 2023. The Bank and the
Treasury will then review the responses and consider whether changes to the proposed
model are necessary. We will publish our response to the consultation.
We will then engage with private sector firms and other stakeholders on the next stage of
work. This will include technological experimentation, particularly through collaboration
with the private sector on proofs of concept17. This work will support the feasibility of the
proposed model, the refinement of the associated technical requirements and the
For an overview see Gaining momentum – Results of the 2021 BIS survey on central bank digital currencies.
See for Example ‘Central bank digital currencies: foundational principles and core features’ (2020) and the
series of reports on digital currency aspects (e.g. financial stability, system design) published in 2021.
17 These are likely to involve testing individual components of the digital pound architecture (against standards built on
the considerations set out in our Technology Working Paper). Project Rosalind, being run out of the London Centre of
the BIS Innovation Hub is one example of the kind of work we envisage. That project is currently running a tech sprint
and expressions of interest are open until 10 February.
15
16

Bank of England

Page 12

development of a technological blueprint for the digital pound. Such a blueprint will provide
evidence that will allow us to evaluate the feasibility and costs of developing a digital
pound. This will be the keystone of our assessment of whether or not to proceed to build.
We have made no decision yet on whether a digital pound would use DLT. Our technology
working paper sets out high-level requirements for a ledger, and makes clear that in
principle these could be fulfilled by conventional or DLT technology. But it is clear that
experimentation with DLT, whether private or public, will be important to ensure it is
appropriately considered. We will be putting in place the capabilities and mechanisms to
increase our technology expertise, and to enhance our ways of working with DLT
technology providers and those seeking to deploy DLT in finance, both through the FMI
Sandbox and the digital pound design phase.
Throughout the next phase we hope to continue to benefit from a wide range of views and
expert advice on the digital pound. This consultation is an important element in that regard,
as is the continued work of the Engagement and Technology Forums which have
supported the Taskforce through the first stage of its work and which will continue.
The money we use and the way we pay has changed throughout history, driven by
technology and the changing needs of society. We have seen significant changes in recent
years and current trends suggest that we are likely to see further major change as
technology and the digitalisation of everyday life advance.
The proposals set out today are designed to ensure that the UK is well placed to take
advantage of the benefits that these changes can offer, while ensuring that we preserve
the safety and uniformity of money in the UK.
Thank you.

I would like to thank Marilyne Tolle, Ali Aswad, Shiv Chowla, Katie Fortune, Stephanie
Haffner, Dovile Naktinyte, Zaki Said, Simon Scorer, Danny Russell, Michael Yoganayagam
and Cormac Sullivan for their help in preparing the text. I would like to thank Andrew
Bailey, Sarah Breeden, Ben Broadbent, Victoria Cleland, Andrew Hauser and Tom Mutton
for their comments.

