Bank of England
Edinburgh Speech Q&A
29th January 2014

Page 3
Speech Q&A - 29th January 2014

Will Dowson:

Thank you for that, Governor. So we've got a short period for
some questions; we'll start over there please.

Alistair Dawson, ..... Masons
Law Firm:

You very helpfully said at the start of your remarks that you made
clear the Bank's role in the event of Scottish independence, that it
would be an implementation role based on whatever was agreed
by the two governments. But can I move slightly forward from
that and ask - is the Bank intending to make any other
interventions in the independence debate ahead of 18th of
September?

Mark Carney, Governor:

I don't know if you heard the question, but it was - in effect, does
the Bank intend to make any other interventions ahead of the with respect to these issues, in advance of the referendum? And
the short answer is - no, we do not. The issues that I've tried to
raise here go directly to our responsibilities, but in commenting on
them we've respected our independence, enforced our
independence by speaking directly to the economic issues - the
underlying economic issues - not opining on solutions to those
economic issues, and certainly not commenting on the broader
question of the relative merits of specific types of monetary
arrangements, or the broader questions - economic questions of
independence.
Now the only caveat I'll say is that, as an independent institution,
we are accountable, as you would expect, to the people of the
United Kingdom. That accountability is discharged in many ways
- answering your questions is one of them - but there's also
answering questions of parliamentarians. And I would be
surprised if we weren't asked questions - myself and my
colleagues - weren't asked questions on this issue in coming
months. But the core is we look at this from a technical
perspective; from an economic perspective we're not going to

Page 4
Speech Q&A - 29th January 2014

provide advice, we're not - as I said at the start, we're not passing
judgement on these issues.
Haig Bathgate, Turcan Connell:

Thanks for that. I was wondering if I could just go back to the start
of your speech and just the wider economic position that we're in
at the moment and particularly whether you'll be able to comment
on sterling's strength of late, just given the current account deficit
position that we have at the moment - now at I think a 24 year
high, and just how that's featuring in your thinking about getting
more balance into the economy?
Another question I had just as well at the same time, was on the
impact of the US on your thinking around interest rate policy, just
in relation to forward guidance, and the fact that the yield curve
has shifted up to despite your comments on keeping rates lower
for longer?

Mark Carney, Governor:

Okay, well you packed a lot in there.
In terms of sterling - we don't - in general we avoid commenting
on the level of the currency or providing a running commentary on
the currency. It has been - the behaviour of the currency has had
important influences on inflation over the course of the last five
years. The depreciation flowed through relatively quickly to
prices. It was one of the reasons why inflation was above target
for several years.
We would expect some pass-through of sterling's strength to help
reinforce other forces that are helping to create a more benign
inflation environment. More benign - I didn't say totally benign but a more benign inflation environment. And they include global
disinflationary pressures; price movements in the eurozone and
in the US are quite weak. The commodity prices as a whole apologies to friends in Aberdeen and beyond - have been weaker

Page 5
Speech Q&A - 29th January 2014

than recent past, down about 10% over the course of the last six
months. So you see it's within a context of providing some
dampening - it provides some dampening to the inflation outlook,
which obviously affects, or is one input into the stance of
monetary policy.
And in terms of the US, it's a little tough - it is a pretty long answer
around the US and I'll spare you that. But obviously it's incredibly
important what happens in the US. And I would say that - I spoke
about this last week - there are some real similarities in the stance
of monetary policy, or the strategy of monetary policy between
the UK and the US. We are not continuing with asset purchases,
so that's different as a tactic. But the general question is how
much slack is there in our economies and to what extent can
providing accommodative policy encourage sustainable demand
to pick up some of that slack?
We provided - for the first phase of forward guidance, we used the
7% unemployment threshold to give businesses in Scotland and
across the UK a confidence that we weren't going to prematurely
withdraw monetary stimulus. The MPC has signalled that we
don't see any need for an immediate adjustment to that policy,
and we will provide further thinking on guidance in the coming
weeks.
But I will say one last point, for those who don't follow the markets
maybe as closely as you may well, that while the market has had
a different view on when the unemployment threshold was going
to be achieved - and the market view has been closer to the base
case forecast of the Bank - the market has clearly taken in that
7% is a threshold not a trigger and in fact market expectations of
when we would raise interest rates are still in 2015, the first
quarter of 2015, which is consistent with that.

Page 6
Speech Q&A - 29th January 2014

Question:

Thank you, Governor. Can I take you back to the beginning of
your speech when you talked about a good start and consumer
spending at the rate that it's got driving an economic growth. My
question to you is really around the sustainability of that and the
extent to which - why do you not think exports have done more to
facilitate economic growth and do we have a sustainability of sort
of 2% growth without business investment?

Mark Carney, Governor:

Yeah, it's 'the' question, so thank you for it. In terms of the
sustainability of consumer spending, there is a sustainable rate of
consumer spending but it's slower than the rate we've seen in the
second half of 2013. What we saw with the pickup of growth was
a fall in the savings rate, quite a notable fall in the savings rate
from precautionary levels to more normal levels. But as you can
appreciate, you only make that adjustment one time, and then
what drives consumption are wages and employment. We're
getting the employment but we're not seeing the wage growth and
you bring that together.
And that leads us to expect that the pace of consumption growth,
the pace of household spending as a whole, including housing
investment, will gradually slow over the course of coming
quarters - which makes it that much more important that we see
investment pick up and ultimately net exports picking up.
I think we feel better about the former than we do about the latter.
Partly on the latter - partly because of the earlier question on
sterling, but more fundamentally because, well risks in Europe
are now a little more balanced; this is in the words of President
Draghi, this is a weak, uneven recovery, modest recovery. It's
about 1% growth in Europe which is well below and it's still our
major export market. So we're not getting that big demand boost
out of Europe. And success there will turn - there and beyond -

Page 7
Speech Q&A - 29th January 2014

will turn on productivity improvements which will be driven by
investment.
On investment I said the news was a little better there, in that we
are starting to see in the figures that there is some pick up in
investment, there was in the third quarter. Certainly from a
survey perspective and conversations, including conversations
we had this morning with some of you, the mood is a little better
on the investment side, a little more of a shift from focusing on
operating expenditures towards capital expenditures. I wouldn’t
overplay that.
And then finally to bring it back to the stance of monetary policy.
That feeds into an environment where we're trying to provide
certainty - as much certainty as we can - to businesses that the
stance of policy, there may be some changes at some point, but
the stance of policy will be consistent in the economy getting
sustained momentum. And that's not going to come from the
household sector.
Bill Drummon, SCDI:

Mark, just to say thank you again on behalf of SCDI members for
coming up today, it's been extremely insightful. When are you
coming back to Scotland?

Mark Carney, Governor:

Whenever you'll have me. I think at the latest I will come back in
the summer. We were talking at lunch, I mean I tend to get up for
some of the Commonwealth Games, if I can get that - can I plug
the Commonwealth Games there? Which is a great event and I'm
looking forward to that.
I will say that, you know, obviously we have Will, Ian and the
colleagues here from the Bank's agency; but my colleague Martin
Taylor who is on the Financial Policy Committee was up in
December. We had another colleague of mine from the regulator,

Page 8
Speech Q&A - 29th January 2014

PRA, was up a couple of weeks ago, Sam Woods, or last week
even. And we have another MPC member - Ian McCafferty is
coming up within the next two months I think. So, you know, you'll
be sick of seeing the Bank of England, but we'll be up and I'll look
forward to seeing a bit of the Games with you, if you don't mind,
Bill. Thank you all.
Will Dowson:

I'd like to thank the SCDI for hosting and all their help with today,
the staff at The George - thank you for lunch and the service, all of
you for coming, but most of all thank you Mark for your speech
and your question and answer session. Thank you very much.

Applause
END

