The PRA’s Approach to Enforcement
Speech given by
Miles Bake, Head of Legal, Enforcement & Litigation Division

Financial Services Lawyers Association, London
16 July 2019

I am grateful to Sonya Branch, Jim Calveley, Olie Dearie and Michael Salib for their comments and
advice in preparing this speech.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches

It is now more than six years since the creation of the Prudential Regulation Authority. In that time, the PRA
has developed a distinctive approach to enforcement. This supports the PRA's prudential mandate, reflects
the fact we are a supervision-led organisation, and reflects too the environment in which we operate – the
numbers and types of firms we supervise, and the risks they pose.1

Our approach to enforcement can be divined through the PRA's various publications and of course through
its decisions and actions. However, to draw it all together, I will take this opportunity:


First, to explain the rationale for PRA enforcement;



Second, to give examples of 'enforcement in action' and key themes, including in relation to
individuals;



Third, to offer some thoughts on our ‘agenda’.

Rationale and approach

It would be trite to observe that prudential supervision did not begin with the creation of the PRA. But the
creation of the PRA, as an arm of the Bank of England, provided an opportunity to consider our prudential
approach afresh. And that included thinking about the function of enforcement.

By enforcement I mean the classic formal use of powers by a public authority to punish, protect and deter:
financial penalties, restrictions on business and – in the case of individuals – prohibition.

Now, the Bank of England, during its first period as bank supervisor, had little scope to consider this kind of
enforcement. The reason was to do with the law. Neither the 1979 nor the 1987 Banking Acts had given the
Bank any civil enforcement powers whatsoever. There were a number of examples of misbehaviour, such as
unlicensed deposit-taking, and misleading the Bank of England, to which a criminal sanction attached. But
apart from those, sanctions were purely supervisory, such as removal of a banking licence.2

The position was different in other parts of the regulated financial services sector. The Financial Services Act
1986 included some statutory enforcement powers, relating primarily to investment business, and these were
built up further through FSMA 2000.3 This Act encoded in statute the full array of civil enforcement powers,
in the hands of the then-new regulator, the FSA, which for the most part are recognisable today.

The PRA was then endowed with broadly the same enforcement powers upon its creation in 2013.

1

For completeness, the Bank of England has certain enforcement powers in its capacities as Resolution Authority, supervisor of
Financial Market Infrastructure, and as overseer of Scottish & Northern Irish Banknotes. This speech only considers the PRA aspect.
2
See Banking Act 1979, sections 1(7) 5(3), 12(5) and 16(7), amongst others; and Banking Act 1987 sections 3(2), 18(3), 19(6), 41(9)
amongst others.
3
Financial Services and Markets Act 2000
2

2

Since then, the PRA has developed how it goes about deploying those powers, in the context of its
prudential supervisory remit. Because it is not enough that the PRA has an arsenal of practical supervisory
tools. Any regulator, needs (for want of a better phrase) a "hard backstop". It has to, for serious breaches,
and for those who do not, or will not, comply with its regulations.

From there, we can sketch out our Enforcement Approach:


We take the PRA's statutory objectives as our lodestar. These are: primarily, promoting the safety
and soundness of the firms that the PRA regulates, and contributing to securing appropriate
protection for insurance policyholders; secondarily, to act in a way which facilitates effective
competition.



We work with the grain of the PRA's supervision-led approach. This emphasises forward-looking and
judgement-based supervision, focusing on the areas of greatest risk to our objectives. Targeted
enforcement action supplements this, but does not supplant it.4



Our priorities are those of the PRA as a whole. The PRA sets strategic goals every year, and these
are embedded in our Referral Criteria for opening investigations.5 There is no autonomous
‘enforcement agenda’.



On a practical level, we liaise extremely closely with supervision and policy colleagues on all key
decisions. For example, decisions to open investigations typically involve a joint assessment process
with supervisors.



In targeting our enforcement efforts, we balance the liability of firms with the importance of driving
accountability amongst senior-level individuals.



We don't ‘jump’ to investigation. We assess potential investigations on the basis of ‘can we?’ and
‘should we?’ – that is, are there legal grounds to investigate; and should we actually do so. To help
explain this, the PRA recently published its referral criteria, a set of considerations to which we have
regard.6 The PRA uses these to consider whether or not to investigate. We fully explore the
alternatives with supervisors. It is a rounded decision. Equally, it means we do not only investigate
as a ‘last resort’ once all else has failed.



Following investigation, the decision on whether to seek settlement is made by senior PRA
executives independent of the investigation team. The case team presents its findings and gives its

4

This is, the approach by which, in practice, the PRA pursues its statutory objectives through supervising firms. It is set out in Prudential
Regulation Authority (2018): Approach to Banking Supervision and Approach to Insurance Supervision
5
Prudential Regulation Authority (2019): Business Plan 2019/20; and Prudential Regulation Authority (2019): PRA Investigation Referral
Criteria
6
Prudential Regulation Authority (2019): PRA Investigation Referral Criteria
3

3

recommendations – but Enforcement itself does not decide.7 This is consistent with the investigators
being, primarily, lawyers nested within the Legal Directorate of the Bank – advising separate
decision-makers.


We recognise that many situations call for response from multiple regulators and other enforcement
agencies, and seek to co-operate with them at every opportunity. This has involved building
relationships, and strengthening links, for example through secondment arrangements.



We operate transparently, and increasingly so. Our publications, from the Referral Criteria which we
published in March, to our Regulatory Investigations Guide,8 to our statutory policies, set out the
process we follow and the built-in safeguards to ensure the independence of our decision-making.
This independence and scrutiny was enhanced last year by the creation of the Bank’s Enforcement
Decision-Making Committee (EDMC), chaired by Sir William Blair, which operates at arm's length
from the PRA on contested cases.9 The EDMC is currently in the process of determining its first
matters and we look forward to learning its decisions.



And as a final point which goes without saying, we approach all investigations with an open mind.
We always have regard to evidenced, relevant representations from the subjects of our
investigations and those who speak for them.

Track record and current portfolio

A look at our track record illustrates how this approach has been put into practice.

To give some idea of scale, since April 2013, the PRA has:


Opened 22 separate cases. This has involved opening investigations into 17 firms and 32 individuals.



Of those, 12 cases have been (or are being) carried out jointly with the FCA. In practice, joint cases
can take a number of forms, ranging from those in which the FCA has led the investigative work
through to others which are more like parallel but co-ordinated investigations. It depends on the facts
and respective objectives of the two regulators.



Out of all those investigations opened into firms, seven investigations have concluded with a settled
outcome, two closed with no enforcement action and eight are ongoing.

See paragraphs 72-81 at pages 13-15 of the Statement of the PRA’s policy on statutory notices and the allocation of decision making
under the Act, within Prudential Regulation Authority (2019): The PRA's Approach to Enforcement: statutory statements of policy and
procedure
8
Prudential Regulation Authority (2019): Regulatory Investigations Guide
9
See Bank of England Press Release announcing membership of the EDMC.
7

4

4



And of those opened into individuals – all senior individuals – 19 are ongoing, seven have been closed
with no PRA enforcement action, and six have resulted in a formal sanction. The statistics may give
you some assurance that we are quite willing to close a matter if that is the rational, appropriate course
of action. There is no ‘enforcement travellator’ leading ineluctably from investigation to sanction.

We currently have 12 cases spread across the full spectrum of the PRA community: across all sizes of
firm, insurers and deposit-takers, international and local.10 Our policy is that we will not normally make the
fact of investigation into an individual or firm public. We are mindful of the risk of any potential damage or
unfairness that may be caused by publicising investigations, prior to determining whether or not a sanction
is appropriate.11

In substance, you will see that our cases have tended to fall into two broad sets:


First, those where conduct by a firm and/or an individual could impair our ability to supervise properly;
or represents behaviour outside the bounds of what the PRA considers acceptable; and



Second, where there has been a crystallised 'risk', action or public event which could have a direct
impact on the PRA’s statutory objectives.

In the first of these, examples of relevant PRA actions are:


Bank of Tokyo Mitsubishi UFJ Ltd/Mitsubishi UFG Securities EMEA plc,12 and related individuals.
Here, the firm and individuals failed to notify us adequately of a potential change to its senior
management. As we said then, the PRA assesses safety and soundness not just against current risks,
but also against those that could plausibly arise further ahead, and requires firms to engage in open
dialogue with the PRA. This includes requiring firms to take the initiative to ensure the PRA has all
relevant information at an early stage.



Qatar Islamic Bank (QIB),13 from 2016, where the firm failed to identify that it had to comply with
certain financial resources requirements; and – and this is key – it failed to report properly certain of its
large exposures. Without that reporting, the PRA lacked the crucial sight-line into the firm’s risk,
hampering our ability to supervise properly.



Our 2015 action against the Co-operative Bank.14 This arose from historical events at that bank
between 2009 and 2013, which are well-known and documented. The PRA faced a potential
crystallised risk but the thrust of our action was against the mis-match between the apparently
'prudent' stance articulated by that firm, and the more aggressive accounting techniques it had actually
employed in that period.

Numbers are correct as at 30 June 2019. An investigation is considered ‘ongoing’ if neither a Final Notice has been issued, nor a
notice of discontinuance.
11
Prudential Regulation Authority (2019): The PRA's Approach to Enforcement: statutory statements of policy and procedure
12
Prudential Regulation Authority 2017: Final Notice Bank of Tokyo Mitsubishi
13
Prudential Regulation Authority 2016: Final Notice QIB
14
Prudential Regulation Authority 2015: Final Notice Co-op Bank
10

5

5

In the second group, where there has been a crystallised risk or public threat to our objectives, I would place
the very first PRA enforcement case, into RBS in respect of an IT outage.15 The Final Notice issued recently
to Raphaels Bank, on similar matters, is another of this type.16 Our action against Millburn Insurance17 and
its former CEO followed that firm entering into insolvency, with our investigation subsequently uncovering a
number of defects in the way it had been run.

The Senior Mangers Regime and enforcement against individuals

I said I would advert to this. For context, the Senior Managers Regime (SMR) is the name given to a
collection of laws and rules and processes designed to improve governance and accountability at
firms. Although it continues to evolve, it came into effect in March 2016.
I’ll start with one very simple point. And it is that senior managers – by that we mean the people who are
responsible for running the firms we regulate – have always been, and will continue to be, squarely within our
appetite and interest. It is why the PRA Business Plan refers to holding “firms, and the individuals who run
them, to account."

On which, I would note that accountability is not the same as culpability. Nor is accountability the same as
punishment. Accountability means having the duty to give an account of matters for which you are
responsible, to explain your actions. Where appropriate, a sanction may be the consequence where the
individual has failed to meet the standards we expect. I labour this point because it is critical: a lack of a
sanction does not mean a lack of accountability.

This approach has been central to the PRA from its inception. Since 2013 the PRA has taken the following
actions against some of the most senior individuals in their firms:


Colin McIntosh – former CEO of Millburn Insurance: fined and prohibited.18



Barry Tootell – former CEO, the Co-Operative Bank: fined and prohibited.19



Keith Alderson – former Director, the Co-Operative Bank: fined and prohibited.20



Akira Kamiya – former Chair, Mitsubishi Securities: fined.21



Tamiko Onodera – former Director, Mitsubishi Securities: fined.22



James Staley – CEO, Barclays: fined.23

15

Prudential Regulation Authority 2014: Final Notice RBS
Prudential Regulation Authority 2019: Final Notice Raphaels Bank
17
Prudential Regulation Authority 2016: Final Notice Millburn Insurance
18
Prudential Regulation Authority 2016: Final Notice Colin McIntosh
19
Prudential Regulation Authority 2016: Final Notice Barry Tootell
20
Prudential Regulation Authority 2016: Final Notice Keith Alderson
21
Prudential Regulation Authority 2018: Final Notice Akira Kamiya
22
Prudential Regulation Authority 2018: Final Notice Tamiko Onodera
23
Prudential Regulation Authority 2018: Final Notice James Staley
16

6

6

In passing, note that none of these, strictly speaking, required the introduction of the Senior Managers
Regime for the enforcement action to proceed to its conclusion.

Indeed, five of these PRA actions against individuals were achieved in relation to conduct preceding the
introduction of the SMR and on the basis of the rules as they then existed. The sixth was on the basis of a
specific individual conduct rule, that of exercising due skill, care and diligence, which itself pre-dated the
SMR.

So, although the SMR may be an enormously important turning point in our regulatory system, it would be a
mistake to think that, for the PRA, its impact lies primarily in the sphere of enforcement. It doesn’t. It lies in
the SMR’s many other aspects – such as the duties on firms to assess fitness and propriety of senior staff, to
provide regulatory references; the power for the PRA to make conditional and time-limited approvals; to
specify responsibilities more clearly, and a host of other attributes.

Set in that context, commentary on enforcement cases which proceeds on the basis that this one or other
case is "an important test of the Senior Managers Regime", in my view suffers from looking at the regime
through the wrong end of the telescope.

Agenda and conclusion

I hope I have made it clear that our working agenda in Enforcement is not distinct from the PRA's agenda.
Enforcement is an aspect of the PRA's supervisory approach, and focuses on investigations which buttress
the PRA’s objectives and strategic goals. None of that will change.

As a result my own immediate priorities tend towards the operational.

The first is, introspectively, to ensure the PRA has the independent operational capability to pursue whatever
cases it needs to. We continue to look for opportunities to improve our effectiveness, whether through use of
technology, nurturing talent, or importing ‘best practice’ from peers – something I am very keen to push
further.
The second is more of a ‘public law’ one. I referred to the EDMC earlier. I also referred to our settlement
decision-makers, panels composed of senior PRA staff independent of the enforcement team. Now, these
are two separate organs and – rightly – operate independently, but it is crucial from a public law perspective
that there is consistency between the two, in the way they interpret our rules and policies. The PRA is a
single authority and our subjects ought to expect broadly the same treatment on the same facts from those
two parallel decision-making bodies.

7

7

For that reason, the proposal in our recent Consultation Paper (CP10/19) 24 on changes to our settlement
policy includes provision for the EDMC to review settled cases after the event.

While this will cover process, it will also I hope give us an opportunity to explore different viewpoints and
ensure the EDMC and the PRA executive remain independent but aligned. It is something I welcome and
look forward to.

The third priority, I have attempted this evening, which is to continue to foster understanding of our approach
in the communities which matter most directly – firms and their legal advisers. We know from experience
that our investigations run more efficiently when our subjects and their legal advisors ‘know where we are
coming from’. That is one reason we published our Regulatory Investigations Guide. We believe our
enforcement actions are more impactful the better they are understood in context. And I believe that you are
better placed to advise your clients accordingly.

That is why I am extremely pleased to have had the opportunity to speak to members of the FSLA tonight,
and why I hope we can continue to engage, to mutual benefit – to the benefit of the PRA and also to the
benefit of the firms you represent – in future.

24

Prudential Regulation Authority (2019): Consultation Paper 10/19
8

8

References

Statutes:
Banking Act 1979
Banking Act 1987
Financial Services Act 1986
Financial Services and Markets Act 2000

Prudential Regulation Authority materials:
Prudential Regulation Authority (2018): Approach to Banking Supervision and Approach to Insurance
Supervision - Approach to Banking Supervision; Approach to Insurance Supervision
Prudential Regulation Authority (2019): Consultation Paper 10/19 - CP10/19
Prudential Regulation Authority (2019): Business Plan 2019/20 - Business Plan 2019/20
Prudential Regulation Authority (2019) PRA Investigation Referral Criteria - PRA Investigation Referral
Criteria
Prudential Regulation Authority (2019): Regulatory Investigations Guide - Regulatory Investigations Guide

Prudential Regulation Authority Final Notices:
Prudential Regulation Authority (2014): Final Notice addressed to Royal Bank of Scotland plc, National
Westminster Bank plc and Ulster Bank Ltd - Final Notice
Prudential Regulation Authority (2015): Final Notice addressed to R. Raphael & Sons Plc - Final Notice
Prudential Regulation Authority (2015): Final Notice addressed to the Co-operative Bank plc - Final Notice
Prudential Regulation Authority (2016): Final Notice addressed to Mr Barry Tootell - Final Notice
Prudential Regulation Authority (2016): Final Notice addressed to Mr Keith Alderson - Final Notice
Prudential Regulation Authority (2016): Final Notice addressed to Millburn Insurance Company Limited Final Notice
Prudential Regulation Authority (2016): Final Notice addressed to Mr Colin McIntosh - Final Notice
Prudential Regulation Authority (2016): Final Notice addressed to QIB(UK) Plc - Final Notice
Prudential Regulation Authority (2017): Final Notice addressed to The Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ Limited
and MUFG Securities EMEA plc - Final Notice
Prudential Regulation Authority (2018): Final Notice addressed to Mr James Staley - Final Notice
Prudential Regulation Authority (2018): Final Notice addressed to Mr Akira Kamiya - Final Notice
Prudential Regulation Authority (2018): Final Notice addressed to Mr Takami Onodera - Final Notice
Prudential Regulation Authority (2019): Final Notice addressed to R. Raphael & Sons Plc - Final Notice

9

9

