Three principles for successful financial sector reform
Speech given by
Chris Salmon, Executive Director of Banking Services and Chief Cashier

At City Week 2012: The International Financial Services Forum, The Queen Elizabeth
Conference Centre, London
7 February 2012

I would like to thank Andrew Hauser, Paul Tucker, Hannah Reynolds, Ben Wensley, Anne Wetherilt,
Iain de Weymarn, Elizabeth Wrigley and Chris Young for their contributions and am grateful for helpful
comments from other colleagues.

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

The City has long played a pivotal role in the provision of financial services, both domestically and
internationally. From raising money for the railway and shipping companies in the 19th Century, through the
growth in metal trading and Eurodollars in the 20th, the City has been at the forefront of the evolution of
global financial markets. And today it continues to occupy a pre-eminent role in many markets, accounting
for example for over a third of all foreign exchange turnover and nearly half of all interest rate derivatives
turnover.

A modern market economy will only flourish if the financial sector reliably provides vital economic functions:
the efficient allocation of savings to investment projects, insurance for households and firms against losses in
bad states of the world, and the ability to make and receive payments safely. Hence, the sector’s
effectiveness has been and remains integral to the success of the economy more generally.

But equally, as the crisis has vividly demonstrated, the financial sector is perhaps uniquely able to inflict
damage on the broader economy. The past five years have not been a happy period for the financial sector
or the economy as a whole. That reminder has motivated intense debate about the role of the financial
sector and has prompted a concerted regulatory response.

I will focus my remarks on that regulatory response, starting by briefly re-capping its over-arching objectives
and the key building blocks through which it will be implemented in the United Kingdom. Given the
complexity of the businesses involved and the cross-border footprint of many financial firms and of much
financial regulation, it is not straightforward to go from objectives to implementation. Any significant reform of
the financial sector carries the risk of failing to achieve the intended changes and instead having adverse
unintended consequences. So having summarised the objectives, I will discuss at more length the approach
the Bank is taking to ensure successful implementation. Finally, and changing the focus somewhat, I will
spend a couple of minutes on some of the opportunities that structural change may offer the City in the
medium term.

Turning first to objectives, stated most simply the aim of the reforms is to fix the flaws which started to
become evident during the summer of 2007. With the benefit of hindsight, it is all too easy to see that banks,
as well as ‘shadow banks’ had become over-leveraged, significant funding vulnerabilities had developed,
and the system had become too inter-connected and opaque, so that the distribution of risks was unclear.
Moreover, the public authorities did not have the ability to resolve banks in an orderly manner when they
failed. In summary, the system was extremely fragile to shocks and the authorities lacked a comprehensive
toolkit to deal with the consequences.

To fix those flaws we need to make institutions individually safer, by making sure that they hold sufficient
loss-absorbing capital and liquid assets to guard against cash squeezes. We need to reduce the scope for
shocks to be transmitted unexpectedly around the financial system, for example by promoting clearing
through central counterparties. It also involves making sure that risks do not build-up at the level of the
2

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

2

system as a whole, say by monitoring overall credit creation from a prudential perspective. And we need to
make sure that resolution regimes are fit for purpose. If we achieve that, then the risk of firms getting into
problems or of abrupt system-wide adjustment should fall, providing a more secure basis for financial
stability. And it should be possible to achieve orderly resolution if firms nevertheless get into distress,
banishing the spectre of tax-payer bail-outs.

Most financial regulation is conducted in the context of internationally agreed standards. Following the crisis
most of the rules applying to financial market behaviour are being changed, and these amendments are one
of two important building blocks in the reforms affecting the UK financial system. In particular each of
Basel III, being implemented in Europe via CRD IV, Solvency II, EMIR and MIFID and new CPSS-IOSCO1
principles for financial market infrastructure will affect the regulation of the UK financial system. The crisis
has also prompted important international coordination in new areas. Most obviously, the Financial Stability
Board has been leading work to agree how the systemically important financial institutions – the so-called
SIFIs – which have cross-border presences can be resolved in an orderly manner. This is a problem which
cannot be resolved by national initiative alone.

In tandem with these international efforts there has clearly been a significant domestic reaction, providing the
other key building block for the reforms. In terms of the regulatory architecture, the key domestic changes
will be contained in legislation. This includes the Financial Services Bill which was introduced last month,
and legislation which the Government has said it plans to bring forward to implement the recommendations
made by the Independent Commission on Banking.

As I am sure most of you know, the new bill will significantly alter the way the UK authorities and particularly
the Bank seek to safeguard financial stability. First, the job of prudential regulation is being re-stated to
‘promoting the safety and soundness of regulated firms ... primarily by seeking to minimise any adverse
effects of firm failure on the UK financial system”, with responsibility transferred to a new subsidiary of the
Bank, the Prudential Regulatory Authority. Second, a Financial Policy Committee (FPC) has been
established within the Bank, initially on an interim basis. The FPC will be the UK’s first macro-prudential
authority. It is tasked with monitoring and assessing risks across the financial system and with bringing
about a macro-prudential response when appropriate. This could include making recommendations to
regulators or, if it identifies risks outside the regulatory boundary, making a recommendation to Treasury to
shift the perimeter.

Given the severity of the crisis few, if any, now argue against the idea that some reform is needed. A more
common refrain, however, is that the planned reforms are too ambitious and should be watered down. One
argument is that the cost of the transition to the new regime will prove prohibitive, particularly after taking into
account the headwinds blowing from the euro-area sovereign debt crisis and unwind of the excesses

1

Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and International Organisation of Securities Commissions.
3

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

3

before 2007. Another argument is that individually sensible reforms will prove to be collectively incompatible,
a risk which is probably heightened given the complex web of sponsoring bodies. The concern is that the
reforms will not achieve their intended aims or will have serious unintended consequences. There is clearly
some basis for these concerns, and risk of flawed implementation cannot be dismissed out of hand.

Short of abandoning ambition, what then is the strategy for managing for this challenge? The FPC has
recommended that banks should build up capital levels where possible, and prioritise doing that over
distributing earnings, in order to increase their resilience to the risks created by difficulties in the euro area.
Beyond dealing with the immediate challenges posed by the euro-zone crisis, the Bank’s approach and, I
believe, UK authorities’ more generally, to successful implementation has been guided by three main
principles.

First, in general it is better to manage the costs of change by having a long-transition period to achieve the
preferred outcome, than it is to water down the reform so that change can be implemented more quickly. In
that regard, the Bank was, and remains, supportive of the long implementation timescales set out for Basel
III, but would be opposed, for example, to any proposals to broaden the definition of capital, to include
instruments which are not truly loss-absorbing. To date, the Basel III discussions have achieved something
akin to the opposite of the US congressional-style pork-barrel politics, with countries agreeing to remove
special capital definitions which had existed in Basel II in order to protect their banks from the need to hold
genuine real capital. We should not give away this success in order to ease the transition.

While basically being supportive of long-transition periods, it is worth recognising that moving towards the
new requirements can also yield shorter-term benefits as well as costs. There were howls of protest when
the FSA introduced liquidity guidance ahead of the Basel III timetable. But the higher liquid asset buffers
which resulted have been helpful for UK banks during the most recent phase of the financial crisis.

And there is one area the Bank has tended to be less persuaded by the benefits of transition periods:
transparency. The costs of producing information are obviously much less than those associated with
changing balance sheet structures, and lack of transparency was an important factor in the run up to and
during the crisis.

To give a specific example where a relatively speedy move to greater transparency may help, the FPC has
recommended that banks publish leverage ratios from the start of 2013, ahead of the Basel III timetables.
These would act as a backstop to capital ratios, which are affected by the risk weights applied to bank
assets. In making this recommendation the FPC drew on market intelligence which suggested that the
opacity of the methods used to calculate risk weights has dented confidence in the published data.

The Bank hears multiple arguments against producing data like leverage ratios, ranging from the idea that
investors will have difficulty interpreting the data, so disclosure could be destabilising, to the suggestion that
4

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

4

investors could calculate simple ratios like this themselves, so they add little value. And sometimes both
arguments are put forward at the same time! In the Bank’s view investors need to be presented with a range
of information, which allows them to build their own picture of a firm. Some of these may be less
sophisticated investors than others, but if we are to reduce the dependence on ratings agencies, more data,
must in general be a good thing.

As a second guiding principle, we need strong dialogue between public authorities to maximise consistency
of approach. Internationally the UK authorities are very active in seeking to maximise the consistency
between various international regulations and actions affecting the UK. In the Bank’s case that involves,
notably, participating in the various Basel committees, contributing to the Financial Stability Board’s work on
resolution regimes, and participating in European Systemic Risk Board, to coordinate macro-prudential policy
across the European Union. Domestically, the composition of the FPC, which will include members from the
Bank, PRA, FCA and Treasury (as well as external members) will support coordination, while the set of
MoUs recently published alongside the Financial Services Bill all place a strong emphasis on information
sharing and cooperation.

In tandem with this, the public authorities need a strong and open dialogue with market participants to
understand the potential impact of proposed reforms, and the scope for tension between different reforms.
The Bank is well-placed to undertake such dialogue, given the importance of the City as an international
financial centre, and the Bank’s long tradition of gathering market intelligence from its extensive network of
contacts and its various markets committees. As and when these discussions convince the Bank that a
genuine conflict exists, the Bank has, and will, privately make the case in official circles to modify aspects of
planned reforms.

Third, we need to recognise the limits of our foresight and build in mechanisms so that rules can be
amended, recalibrated or adjusted to take account of future developments. One of the responsibilities of the
FPC will be to scan the horizon for just such developments – for example the build up of risks in the
non-regulated financial sector – and if necessary it will recommend to the Treasury that the regulatory
treatment of such activities be changed.

The case study of clearing through central counterparties provides a good example of challenges involved in
getting the reforms right. One lesson from the crisis was that a rise in counterparty exposures had increased
the vulnerability of the major financial systems and the point of the G-20 promotion of clearing through
central counterparties was to reduce that vulnerability. But, as Paul Tucker noted in a speech last year2, that
only really makes sense if the central counterparties themselves are sufficiently robust; if they approach
their roles, in his words, as ‘systemic risk managers’. That requires conservative liquidity management and
margining policies, complemented by appropriately-sized default resources. And it requires effective

2

“Central Counterparties: the agenda” http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2011/speech524.pdf
5

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

5

loss-sharing or resolution mechanisms in the event that a CCP nevertheless gets into difficulty. Instead, it is
not impossible to imagine CCPs being tempted to use the G-20 announcements to compete for the new
business opportunities by, say, lowering margining requirements. Over the past two years a committee of
regulators has been working to update the international standards for financial market infrastructures to
ensure that they remain fit for purpose and the Bank has been actively participating in that work. These new
standards are due to be published in the spring. It is likely that a number of CCPs will need to modify their
operations to meet these new standards, and it will be the job of supervisors internationally to hold their feet
to the fire. From next year, as part of the regulatory reforms, the Bank will assume that responsibility for
supervising UK-located CCPs.

Then we need to identify which instruments should be centrally cleared, given the objective of reducing
systemic risk. The Bank is devoting considerable time to this question and will feed our conclusions into the
international discussions taking place in ESMA3 and IOSCO. A number of factors, such as the liquidity in the
underlying market, standardisation of legal terms or degree to which trades are straight-through processed,
will be relevant to determining where central clearing would be helpful. A key consideration is whether the
CCP can safely manage the risk exposures it incurs. We have also been engaging in Basel negotiations to
seek to ensure that the capital charge on banks for their exposures to CCPs is proportionate to the risks they
bear. Excessive charges would just encourage the transfer of business to non-standardised, less liquid
products that could be traded bilaterally under the rules, defeating their purpose.

Looking forward, even if the capital charges are set appropriately, it may well be that some activity does
migrate in this manner in future years, as market participants seek to circumvent the intent of the CCP
reforms. In the new regulatory world, the FPC, amongst others, will be alert to the emergence of any such
trends and will be able recommend corrective action through the appropriate competent authorities.

Clearly this approach will not avoid transition costs entirely; that is not possible. Nor will it be possible to
create a jigsaw in which all of the individual reforms affecting firms operating in the UK fit together completely
seamlessly. But I see no reason why the approach outlined above should not succeed in delivering a
coherent set of reforms which have not been watered down, creating a more durably safe financial sector,
while keeping unintended consequences acceptably small.

If that is the key long-term challenge facing the public authorities, then the task facing market participants will
be to adjust their businesses to the opportunities created by the new regulatory framework and other
structural changes affecting global capital markets. Recognising that this is a perilous business let me
nevertheless suggest three possible sets of opportunities for the City.

3

The European Securities and Markets Authority
6

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

6

One possible theme is that demand for some intra-financial sector services will grow. Specifically, if it is no
longer possible to use leverage to boost headline returns, then tighter cost controls and efficiencies may
provide a more-traditional if less glamorous way of securing a return on assets. To give one example, greater
use of central counterparties is going to result in greater collateral demands, probably substantially so. Firms
are going to have to learn to manage their collateral more efficiently, and that in turn could well stimulate
demand for new collateral management services. And more generally, a drive for efficiency across the
sector might create new opportunities for ancillary back-office service providers, many of which are located in
the City.

A second theme could be an expansion in the range of firms accessing funding directly from capital markets.
There have been some moves in this direction in recent years, with asset managers setting up loan funds to
lend directly to companies. Any shift by investment banks to increase the fees they earn from advisory
services to compensate for what could well be lower propriety trading revenues could act to reinforce this
tendency. The City, with its deep and liquid capital markets, and predominance of asset managers and
investment bankers would seem to be a natural place to benefit from such developments.

A third possibility is that structural changes in the global economy could create new opportunities for the City.
This includes the much discussed possibility of developing an off-shore renminbi (RMB) market in London.
The development of euro-bond markets in the 1970s is taken as a blueprint for what could happen in the
2010s in relation to RMB. There might be scope for the official sector to play a catalysing role at the margin,
but the key arbiter in determining if such a market develops will be whether the private sector can identify
and satisfy any underlying demand for RMB denominated securities.

A Bank official speaking at a conference such as this a couple of decades ago might have referred to the
Bank’s then third core purpose – to promote the efficiency and competitiveness of the UK's financial
services. That, rightly, is no longer a distinct objective for the Bank. In 2012, given its twin core purposes of
maintaining monetary and financial stability, the most effective way we can support the City, or non-financial
services, or manufacturing is to create the stable financial and monetary conditions which will allow them to
prosper.

Well thought through and effectively implemented reforms can help to rebuild the trust in the financial system
that is necessary for a sustained economic recovery. Scaling-back our ambitions for the reforms, for
example by blurring capital definitions as some have suggested recently, or weakening the thrust of the new
liquidity requirements, would involve sacrificing long term gains and missing the great opportunity that we
currently have to refashion the financial system. Sticking to the task, and delivering the intent of planning
changes is a key challenge facing the official sector, here and overseas, over forthcoming years.

7

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches

7

