UDROP – A Contribution to the New International Financial
Architecture * **
Speech given by
Willem H. Buiter, Member Monetary Policy Committee and Professor of International
Macroeconomics, University of Cambridge, CEP, NBER and CEPR

Anne C. Sibert
Professor of Economics, Birkbeck College, University of London and CEPR

At the Royal Institute of International Affairs in London
22 October 1998
Revised 10 May 1999

*8 Willem H. Buiter and Anne C. Sibert 1998, 1999.
**The opinions expressed are those of the authors only. They do not necessarily represent those of
the Bank of England or of the other members of its Monetary Policy Committee. We would like to
thank two anonymous referees, as well as Richard Brealey, Barry Eichengreen, Maxwell Fry, Mervyn
King and Ian Plenderleith for helpful comments on an earlier version of this article. The paper was
presented at a Seminar at De Nederlandsche Bank on March 5, 1999. We would like the organiser,
Age Bakker (of the Nederlandsche Bank), our discussant, Han de Jong (of ABN Amro Bank), and the
other seminar participants for helpful comments. Special thanks are due to Bert van Selm
(Netherlands Ministry of Finance) and to Wim Boonstra (Rabobank), who provided detailed and
constructive suggestions for enhancing UDROP.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

Abstract
The purpose of the UDROP proposal is to prevent debt rollover crises for foreign-currencydenominated debt instruments. For such liabilities, there is no international analogue to the
domestic lender of last resort or to domestic deposit insurance. UDROP stands for Universal
Debt Rollover Option with a Penalty. Our proposal is that all foreign currency liabilities should
have a rollover option attached to them. The ‘pure’ version of the option would entitle the
borrower to extend or roll over his performing debt at maturity for a specified period. The
pricing of the option would be left to the contracting parties. A number of variants on the basic
version are also considered. These make the individual borrower=s ability to exercise his option
contingent on the prior declaration of a state of ‘disorderly markets’, by the national central
bank, the International Monetary Fund or an indicator of ‘disorderly markets’. All versions
of the scheme have the property that no commitment of public money is required, either by
national governments or by international agencies such as the IMF or the World Bank.
UDROP also ensures that all creditors, private and public, are automatically ‘bailed in’.
The UDROP proposal is rule based and general: it is mandatory for all foreign-currency debt
and automatic. That is, it is exercised at the discretion of the borrower. This stands in sharp
contrast to the current practice of discretionary and politicised refinancing arrangements cobbled
together in an ad-hoc manner on a case-by-case basis by the IMF – an approach continued
in the recent scheme for contingent ‘contagion’ credit lines (Contingent Credit Lines) proposed
by the Fund. UDROP is market-oriented: the terms and conditions on any foreign-currency
loan and associated rollover option would be negotiated by the lenders and borrowers. It is
immune to the ‘dynamic hedging critique’, according to which a borrower could undo the effect
of the mandatory rollover insurance by subsequent trading in contingent claims. This is because
all foreign currency liabilities, including contingent liabilities, would be required to carry a
rollover option. In the case of contingent liabilities, the amount of rollover insurance required
would be the magnitude of the foreign currency liability that arises when the contingency defining
the contingent claim materializes.

JEL Classification Numbers: F31, F32, F33, F34, G13.
Key Words: Liquidity crisis, disorderly markets, foreign debt rollover option, contingent
credit line, dynamic hedging.
Authors:
Willem H. Buiter
Bank of England, Threadneedle Street, London EC2R 8AH, UK
Tel. 44-171-6014071
E-mail: willem.buiter@bankofengland.co.uk
or
Faculty of Economics and Politics, University of Cambridge
Sidgwick Avenue, Cambridge CB3 9DD, UK
Tel. 44-1223-335210
E-mail: willem.buiter@econ.cam.ac.uk
Anne C. Sibert
Department of Economics, Birkbeck College, University of London
7-15 Gresse Street, London W1P 2LL, UK
Tel. 44-171-6316420
E-mail: asibert@econ.bbk.ac.uk

1

I. Liquidity Crises: the Problem
Sometimes a solvent borrower with illiquid assets and short-term liabilities faces a
liquidity crisis.1 Consider a bank whose liabilities are convertible on demand into cash and
whose assets consist of old-fashioned, non-securitised loans. These loans are all as safe as Fort
Knox or the Bank of England, but they have long remaining maturities. As long as most
depositors believe that there will not be a run on the bank, there is no reason for any depositor
to cash in his deposit and the bank is safe. If, however, a belief arises that enough depositors
may withdraw their deposits at short notice, each depositor has an incentive to convert his
deposit into cash. In a first-come, first-served environment, where cashable claims exceed the
cash in the till, a bank run is the only individually rational response. The bank will fail.
The bank run represents a co-ordination failure. The ‘run’ equilibrium is Paretodominated by the ‘don’t run’ equilibrium. The reason is that bank failures, like any default,
involve more than a lump-sum redistribution of ownership rights. Real resources are destroyed
in the process of financial restructuring. Default is therefore socially and well as privately costly.
Unnecessary defaults should be avoided. This is one reason we have, at the national level, a
number of second-best institutional arrangements aimed at preventing a bank run. These
include, a lender of last resort (the central bank), deposit insurance (ultimately underwritten by
the ministry of finance), and unscheduled bank holidays. In the case of a wide-spread systemic
panic, only the resources of the state2 are adequate to convince lenders that a run is not

1 The classic paper on bank runs is Diamond and Dybvig [1983]. See also Diamond [1984]
and Dybvig [1992]. For international models of self-fulfilling debt crises see Cole and Kehoe
[1996] and Krugman [1997].
2 We are viewing the central bank as the monetary agent of the state. Whatever the formal
independent status of the central bank in monetary policy matters, the central bank is the
monetary agent of the state, inextricably linked to the rest of the state apparatus through the
ability of the general government (through the ministry of finance) to tax the central bank.
1

privately rational. The unique position of the state reflects its monopoly of the use of legitimate
force and compulsion, expressed through the power to tax and declare certain of its bearer
liabilities to be legal tender. This power to issue domestic legal tender means that the state,
uniquely, has the means to support and bail out any borrower whose liabilities are denominated
in domestic currency.3
A country with a fixed exchange rate can face the same problem as a bank if its financial
sector has a large short-term foreign-currency debt that is not hedged with comparable shortterm foreign-currency assets.4 Imagine an emerging market commercial bank that has
borrowed hard currency abroad and made domestic-currency loans. This foreign-currency
borrower is solvent and if the short-term debt can be rolled over, it will be serviced in full. But,
if its foreign creditors are seized by one of the occasional waves of panic that have swept the
international financial system for centuries, the debt rollover will not take place or only on terms
little related to the underlying creditworthiness of the borrower. Faced with an urgent need for
foreign exchange to repay the maturing short-term debt, the borrower will turn to the central
bank. If the value of the maturing debt exceeds the available foreign exchange reserves of the

3 The state could, of course, grant the right to issue legal tender to other, private agencies. If
the bearer liabilities of these private agencies had to be accepted as legal tender at par, the
private agencies in question become de facto state agencies. If their bearer liabilities have to
be accepted in final settlement of debt, but only on terms to be determined by the market,
this ‘privatisation’ of legal tender property would be without significance.
4 For recent reminders see International Monetary Fund [1998], especially Section II, AThe
Crisis in Emerging Markets@ and Section III, ATurbulence in Mature Financial Markets@ and
Goldstein [1998]. Interesting theoretical models of international contagion and crisis include
Caballero and Krishnamurthy [1998], Corsetti, Pesenti and Roubini [1998a], Chang and
Velasco [1998a,b], Chan-Lau and Chen [1998], Huang and Xu [1998], Loisel and Martin
[1999]. Empirical studies of the most recent crises include Dornbusch, Goldfajn and Valdes
[1995], Sachs, Tornell and Velasco [1996], Glick and Rose [1998], Kaminsky and Reinhart
[1998], Corsetti, Pesenti and Roubini [1998b] and Eichengreen and Rose [1998]. The role of
liquidity is highlighted in Goldfajn and Valdes [1997] and in Demirguç-Kunt and Detragiache
[1997].
2

central bank, a foreign exchange crisis results.5 The local currency plunges, creating an
imbalance between foreign-currency liabilities and domestic-currency assets that can wipe out
domestic banks’ capital. Bank failures may occur and if the government is among the
borrowers, it too can default. The crisis spreads to the country=s commercial and industrial
borrowers. Foreign lenders must write off their loans. If the scale of the problem is large
enough, a global financial crisis can ensue. As with the domestic bank run, an international
liquidity crisis results in unnecessary, socially costly defaults.
Of course, foreign exchange crises can occur without foreign-currency-denominated
external loans. Suppose a country has a fixed exchange rate and domestic banks have only
home-currency liabilities. If international capital flows are unrestricted, domestic residents can
decide to swap their liquid domestic financial assets into foreign exchange. The central bank is
stripped of its foreign exchange reserves and must devalue its currency or let it float. However,
there are two differences between this and the previous scenario. First, there is no default on
external debt and, second, there is no mismatch between foreign-currency liabilities and
domestic-currency assets in resident banks’ balance sheets. This precludes the defaults and
bankruptcies otherwise associated with a currency collapse.
Under a floating exchange rate regime, future exchange rates are always uncertain.
Sensible and risk averse foreign-currency borrowers take precautions to lower the chances of
finding themselves with too large a net short foreign exchange position. However, any open
position can turn against a market participant. If the exposure is sufficiently large, this can result
in bankruptcy. Supervision and regulation should ensure that the private and social costs and
returns to foreign-currency investments are closely matched.
Although banking crises can occur with floating exchange rates, fixed exchange rate

5 Including access to borrowed foreign exchange reserves.

3

regimes may foster a moral hazard problem. In Asia, those who acquired short-term foreign
exchange loans assumed that the central bank would underwrite the exchange risk by
maintaining the pegged exchange rate.
In principle, central banks can always fight off a speculative attack. All they must do
is set overnight and other short-term interest rates high enough to achieve the necessary
contraction of domestic credit. The requisite rates depend on the perceived commitment of the
central bank, and without credibility they may be very high indeed. For example, a confidently
expected 10 percent devaluation of the currency overnight, requires a 10 percent overnight
interest rate differential (at a daily rate) to discourage speculators. The corresponding
annualised rate causes an overflow on most small hand calculators. During the ERM crisis of
1992 - 1993, the central banks of Sweden and Ireland were unable to stave off devaluation
even though they set the rates charged by their central banks on overnight reserves at 500 and
300 percent, respectively.6
The political unpopularity of very high rates, and the real economic damage they do to
borrowers affected by it, make a policy of defending a fixed exchange rate by interest rate
increases ‘à l=outrance’ less than fully credible. While there exists an equilibrium where a
credible peg is defended successfully with relatively low interest rates, the more likely outcome
is an unsuccessful attempt to defend an incredible peg with very high rates. A few currency
pegs, such as the currency boards of Argentina and Hong Kong, have survived. But, for most
countries, a currency peg remains a high-risk strategy.
Following the demise of the gold standard after World-War I and the Great Depression
of the 1930s, both mainstream academic opinion and the political conventional wisdom have

6 See Buiter, Corsetti and Pesenti [1998a,b].
4

accepted the primacy of the domestic stabilisation role of monetary policy. The notion that
monetary policy could be devoted solely to the defence of an exchange rate peg became
incredible. During the Bretton Woods era, capital controls were widespread and the
vulnerability of currency pegs could be hidden or suppressed for a while. With the nearly
unfettered financial capital mobility of today, currency pegs die much more swiftly and
spectacularly.
A foreign-currency version of deposit insurance is not feasible. Neither is an
international lender of last resort. Domestic deposit insurance is ultimately underwritten by the
central bank and the treasury and relies on the central bank’s ability to produce the necessary
cash to pay off footloose depositors. The deposit insurer, like any lender of last resort, must
have deep pockets. Faced with a foreign exchange crisis, a national central bank does not have
and cannot to borrow the required foreign exchange. Only external entities with full coffers can
hope to stop a bank run.
To a small extent, the IMF, other international financial institutions, and the creditorcountry governments, have tried to be an international lender of last resort. They do this either
with their own money or by pressuring private financial institutions into involuntary rollovers and
other forms of involuntary credit extension.7 In the 14 months since the Asian crisis arose, three
things have become apparent: first, the G-10s’ and multilaterals’ pockets are not deep enough;
second, their ability or willingness to cajole unwilling creditors into involuntary rollovers is too
limited; and third, the adverse selection and moral hazard problems inherent in any conceivable
global deposit insurance or lender-of-last-resort arrangement are too severe. Conventional IMF
lending, with conditionality and money available only in tranches is inappropriate for dealing with

7 The truth is not served by the Orwellian practice of calling loans Avoluntary@

rolled over after arm-twisting by multilateral agencies and G10 governments.
5

when they are

a liquidity crisis. With neither ‘international deposit insurance’ nor an international lender of last
resort feasible options, we turn to another entry on the ‘second-best’ menu: mandatory foreign
debt rollover insurance.

II.

UDROP: a Proposal
We propose a universal debt rollover option with a penalty (UDROP) to deal

with liquidity crises. All foreign-currency IOUs must have a rollover option attached to it. This
includes private and sovereign, long-term and short-term, marketable and non-marketable,
negotiable and non-negotiable debt, including overdrafts, credit lines and contingent claims.8
In the case of contingent claims, the rollover should be for the value of the liability realized when
the contingencies that define the claim materialize. For sake of brevity, we will refer to all
foreign currency obligations as >loans=. This option would entitle the borrower, at his sole
discretion, to extend maturing debt for a specified period (say three or six months) at a penalty
rate.9 The borrower would be entitled to the rollover only if the debt in question had been
serviced in full, barring the final repayment. The UDROP would permit no further extensions
after the initial rollover. For the scheme to work, the penalty must be large enough to ensure
that the borrower would not exercise the rollover option under orderly market conditions. It
might be specified as a hefty surcharge on top of the spread over LIBOR that the borrower

8 It is important that the option be for both short and long-term foreign currency debt, because
over time over time, long maturities have a habit of becoming short maturities. Only if all debt
took the form of perpetuities (liabilities with infinite maturities) would rollover crises not occur.
Most private financial instruments have finite maturities. Equity is an obvious exception. Very
few governments have issued perpetuities. British government consols are an notable exception.
9 Richard Brealey has pointed out to us that, as an implication of put-call parity, the short loan
cum rollover option is equivalent to a longer loan with a pre-payment option. If the rollover is
priced at a penalty rate, the prepayment would be priced at a discounted rate.
6

would normally pay for the currency in question. This ‘normal’ spread might be computed as
a long-run moving average of the actual market spreads.
We expect the penalty spread and other features of the rollover contract, to be
negotiated between debtors and creditors, rather than decreed by a government or international
body. While borrowers would be obliged to acquire and retain a rollover option for the full face
value of the debt, the pricing of these options is up to market participants. One possible pricing
structure might be an upfront commitment fee plus a rule for determining the ‘penalty spread’
over the ‘normal spread’ on the loan extension if the rollover option is exercised.10
The ambitions behind this proposal are modest. Default is costly.

Unnecessary

defaults should be avoided. Disorderly markets can cause foreign currency debt rollover crises
that result in unnecessary defaults. Disorderly market conditions are unusual and short-lived.
The rollover option allows foreign currency debtors to ride out the storm until orderly market
conditions prevail again and new debt can be issued. UDROP ensures that, in times of crisis
and disorderly markets, all creditors, private and public, are automatically ‘bailed in’. It will only
be useful when otherwise solvent borrowers are unable to roll over their foreign-currency debt
because of a liquidity crisis. It is meant solely to minimise the consequences of disorderly
markets. This scheme is ineffective if a debtor (country) is insolvent. 11 In the case of Russia,
for example, the government=s chronic inability to raise tax revenues commensurate with its
spending ambitions, makes our option scheme irrelevant. A country that is able, but unwilling,
to service its maturing debt would likewise not be reformed by this scheme. It would roll over
its debt at the penalty rate and default at the end of the rollover period. Our proposal only helps

10 This >rule= could of course be as simple as a fixed number.
11 It is a drawback of the proposal that insolvent borrowers can postpone formal default by
exercising the rollover option. See Sections III.1 and III.2.
7

when a country is solvent and willing to pay, but is prevented from doing so because
international financial and credit markets have a temporary seizure. Korea would have benefited
from this scheme. Brazil would be less stressed if its maturing debt had a rollover option
attached to it.
There is no risk that introducing UDROPs into loan agreements will cause additional
crises. The contrary argument is that creditors, anticipating that the maturity of their credit is
about to be extended, will scramble out of the market in anticipation of this possibility, where
in the absence of the option they would have been prepared to stay in. However, creditors
would only anticipate that the maturity of their credit is about to be extended through the
exercise of UDROPs, if they anticipated a rollover crisis. If they anticipated a roll-over crisis,
they would have as strong an incentive to bail out without a UDROP attached to their loan, as
they would have with a UDROP.
More to the point, creditors with UDROPs attached to their loans can only ‘bail out’
before the loan matures, by selling the loan, inclusive of the UDROP. Some other would-be
creditor would have to ‘bail in’. If they ‘bail out’ when the loan matures, by reducing their net
foreign exposure (assuming that no UDROP is exercised on maturity), there is no liquidity crisis
on maturity, and the decision to reduce the foreign exposure can be viewed as the appropriate
response to the risk of being forced into future rollovers. UDROPs may (should) make
creditors more wary about entering into foreign currency loans. They will not increase the
incentive to ‘bail out’, once a loan (with UDROP) has been contracted.
The UDROP proposal is only meant to address disorderly market conditions. Large
sudden capital inflows or outflows can, even under orderly market conditions, create serious
dislocations in the real economy. It does not help countries cope more effectively with

8

overvalued exchange rates and overheating economies, nor does it address the ultimate causes
of these common problems.
There are many grander proposals for improving the international financial system.
These include proposals for restraining capital flows, either with ‘Tobin taxes’ or ‘Chilean-style’
administrative controls and descriptions of mechanisms to facilitate an ‘orderly workout’ of
sovereign debt defaults.12 Our scheme is compatible with these proposals, but its effectiveness
does not depend on their success.
Under the ‘pure’ version of the scheme, no third party determines whether the
conditions for exercising the option have been satisfied. No central bank or national supervisory
or regulatory agency nor the International Monetary Fund or any other international financial
institution is called upon to judge whether economic and market conditions warrant the
exercising of the option. The exercise of the option is at the sole discretion of the borrower.
This is attractive because a ‘liquidity crisis’ is not always verifiable.
In Section III.1 we consider variations on the UDROP proposal where the option
cannot be exercised without the prior declaration of a state of disorderly markets by either the
relevant central bank, the IMF, or a mechanical ‘disorderly markets trigger’. These versions
of the scheme retain the attractive property that no commitment of public money is required,
either by national governments or by international agencies.

III. UDROP Close Up
In this Section we consider some of the characteristics of the UDROP proposal of

12 See Dornbusch [1998] and Fischer et. al. [1998] for a discussion of the former type of plan
and Eichengreen and Portes [1995], Sachs [1995, 1996], Kenen [1996], Eichengreen [1998]
and Litan [1998] for descriptions of the latter. Eaton [1987, 1989] analyses the welfare costs of
capital flight in a second-best world.
9

Section II in greater detail.
III.1 Why does the rollover option apply only to foreign-currency liabilities?
There is no lender of last resort for domestic borrowers with foreign-currency liabilities.
Our proposal is aimed at filling this gap. For domestic-currency-denominated liabilities, the
national central bank is a domestic lender of last resort. It can always print any amount of
domestic currency to accommodate a sudden surge in demand.13 In the absence of an
international lender of last resort with an unlimited capacity for creating foreign currency, the
same does not apply to foreign-currency-denominated liabilities.14
It may be the case that requiring UDROPs for domestic currency-denominated liabilities
It is indeed the case that our proposal merely shifts potential liquidity problems from
foreign currency borrowers to foreign currency lenders. That, however, is exactly what is
required when the lenders have access to an effective lender of last resort and the borrowers
do not. Lenders will, effectively if only implicitly, rely on their own central banks for liquidity
support to cover such contingencies. These central banks will try to price this liquidity risk
properly and thus, paraphrasing Bagehot’s dictum, lend freely in a crisis but at a penalty rate.
While this will act as a tax on international lending, it should be viewed as a Pigovian, allocative
efficiency-enhancing tax.
Applying UDROP only to foreign-currency liabilities creates an additional asymmetry

13 The logic of our proposal therefore implies that no UDROP would be attached to
instruments like the Mexican tesobonos, treasury bills that were foreign currency indexed
rather than foreign currency denominated. Since interest and principal were payable in
Mexican pesos, and since the Central Bank of Mexico can be an effective lender of last
resort for borrowers caught in a rollover crisis involving peso-denominated financial claims.
14 There is of course nothing to stop lenders and borrowers in domestic currency from
creating their own, voluntary debt rollover options (VDROPs).
10

between debtors who differ in the currency in which their debt is denominated.15 Imagine, for
example, a bank which has made two loans to domestic residents, one denominated in the
domestic currency and one denominated in a foreign currency. If either borrower defaults, the
creditor can appeal to the domestic courts and may be able to attach some of the debtor=s
assets. However, the invocation of default procedures following nonpayment of the loan is
immediate in the case of the domestic-currency borrower. In the case of the foreign-currency
borrower with UDROP attached, the default procedures are postponed for the duration of the
period for which UDROP permits the debt to be rolled over. This need not create a problem,
however. Market pricing of the UDROP option will ensure that lenders are indifferent between
the two types of loans.
UDROP is not without drawbacks as it may worsen adverse-selection problems in
credit markets. An adverse-selection problem may occur when lenders are unable to distinguish
between borrowers with different characteristics. For example, some borrowers may be more
likely to become insolvent in orderly markets than others and this may not be observable to
lenders. If the invocation of the UDROP proposal is at the discretion of borrowers then it can
be invoked by insolvent borrowers in orderly markets and well as by fundamentally sound
borrowers in disorderly markets. This makes foreign-currency loans with UDROP more
attractive to the relatively risky borrowers. If the lenders try to charge a risk premium in the
form of a higher penalty rate, then UDROP would become less attractive to the safer borrowers
and more attractive to the risky ones. There may be no penalty rate at which lenders want to
satisfy foreign-currency loan demand. Adverse selection typically leads to inefficiency.16

15 This was emphasised out by Bert van Selm during the March 5, 1999 seminar at the
Nederlandsche Bank where the UDROP proposal was discussed.
16 UDROP may also cause moral-hazard problems. Once the option is invoked, borrowers
may have an incentive to engage in riskier behaviour than they otherwise would. However, this
11

In Section III.3 we consider mechanisms for minimising the risk of abuse of the option.
Even when the exercise of the option is at the sole discretion of the borrower, we believe that
the potential for abuse, while real, is unlikely to outweigh the benefits of the proposal. There are
two reasons for this.
First, the initiation of legal default proceedings against defaulters on foreign-currency
liabilities is postponed for the duration of the rollover (we expect this to be between three and
six months), rather than avoided permanently. Second, the lender and the borrower are free
to negotiate any terms and conditions for the rollover package. In countries with reasonable
debtor-creditor laws, the adverse selection problem may be mitigated with collateral
requirements.

Lenders can offer both UDROP contracts with high penalty rates and low

collateral and UDROP contracts with lower penalty rates and high collateral. Then borrowers
will sort themselves by type. Those who are likely to become insolvent in orderly markets
prefer the former contract; those who are unlikely to be insolvent except in disorderly markets
prefer the latter.
III.2 Should the option be for one or for multiple rollovers?
Our proposal is for a mandatory option for one fixed-term rollover only. One could,
in principle, envisage a UDROP for a sequence of rollovers, each one at a higher penalty rate
than the previous one. There are several reasons for not going this route. First, in the limit it
would permit an insolvent borrower (or a borrower who is unwilling to meet the terms of the
original debt contract), to engage in what effectively would be Ponzi finance, without the creditor
being able to invoke the sanctions of formal default and bankruptcy.17 Second, rollover crises

does not obviously lead to inefficiency. See Besley [1994] and Aizenman [1998] for discussions
of adverse-selection and moral-hazard problems in loan markets.
17 Consider a sequence of one-period maturity loans. In a Ponzi scheme, the borrower each
12

tend to be intense but short-lived. A three or six month extension to the original loan should
enable the dust to settle.
III.3 Should a party other than the borrower pull the trigger?
In its pure form our proposal envisages calls for the rollover option to be exercised at
the sole discretion of the borrower.18 Wim Boonstra has argued that a possible solution to
adverse-selection problems associated with UDROP is to alter the way the option is
triggered.19 The idea is to find a mechanism so that UDROP is exercised only in ‘disorderly
market conditions’ rather than in ‘normal’ times.
Boonstra=s first proposal involves giving national central banks the power to decide
when a liquidity crisis has occurred. The UDROPs can be exercised only after a crunch has
been officially declared. We do not believe the central bank should rule on individual cases.
The pressure on the central bank to act hastily would preclude the bank from being able to
gather sufficient information to do so. It would also create a serious threat of corruption and
would encourage wasteful rent-seeking by interested parties.
Even if the central bank remained virtuous and disinterested, its competence in this area
can be questioned. In many countries, the central bank is close to being a pure ‘monetary
authority’ with very limited supervisory and regulatory functions. Even when it has significant
supervisory and regulatory functions, it is unlikely to have the information necessary to make the

period borrows an amount at least equal to last period=s principal plus interest due.
18 The ‘European’ option format, according to which an option can be exercised only at a
specific date (in our case the expiration date of the original loan contract) seems slightly simpler
than the ‘American’ option format, under which the option can be exercised any time before or
at a specific date, but no issue of principle is involved.
19 At the March 5, 1999 seminar at the Nederlandsche Bank and in subsequent
correspondence.
13

>illiquid= vs. >insolvent= call with any degree of accuracy. There is also no reason to believe that
the most exposed foreign-currency debtors will be central-bank-regulated financial
intermediaries. Indeed they may not be classified as financial intermediaries at all.
The allure of the UDROP proposal is that it does not require any intrusive vetting of
would-be rollover candidates by some third party. Restricting the role of the central banks to
that of determining a state of national disorderly markets might not compromise the strengths of
UDROP too much. Granting the national central banks the power to authorize the exercise of
UDROPs by all borrowers in their jurisdiction would be a natural extension of the lender of last
resort function of the central bank. Note, however, that among the foreign currency debtors
who might wish to invoke the rollover option could be a national government or indeed a central
bank itself. The potential for abuse of UDROP by the insolvent would therefore not be
completely eliminated.
In another version of UDROP, the power to make a determination of disorderly
markets (either at the national level or at a wider regional or global level) would rest with the
IMF rather than with central banks. However, one of the strengths of the pure UDROP
proposal is that it keeps politically mandated international bureaucrats out of the debt rollover
game. Our proposal is rule-based, market-oriented and general. This is at the opposite end
of the spectrum from IMF operations, which tend to be discretionary, intensely political and
case-by-case. Inevitably, a decision on whether to declare a condition of national disorderly
market would be tied up with how happy the IMF felt with a country=s general compliance with
IMF standards of good behaviour. The experience of the last two decades raises doubts about
whether the Fund possesses the expertise, the clout or the political independence to be an

14

effective arbiter.20 The only role for the IMF that would preserve the key strenghts of UDROP
would be for the Fund to be granted the authority to authorize the exercise of UDROPs globally,
by declaring a state of ‘global disorderly markets’.
A final restriction on the pure debtor-initiated trigger mechanism, also proposed by
Boonstra, would be to base the determination of a condition of national disorderly markets on
a mechanical rule, based on observable and ‘objective’ indicators, rather than on the judgement
of a central bank or a multilateral agency. One definition of ‘disorderly markets’ might be a
rapid and large increase in the spread on sovereign debt over the relevant benchmark. Another
might be a sufficiently sudden and sizable loss of net foreign exchange reserves. It is essential
for this alternative, that the relevant variables are well defined, that they can be measured swiftly
and that their values are verifiable. Speed, automaticity, universality and absence of political
interference must remain the hallmarks of the UDROP.
III.4 Should the rollover option be mandatory or voluntary?
The reason for making the rollover option mandatory is that rollover risk is not correctly
priced in international financial markets. An important reason for this is adverse selection.
Some might object that creditworthy borrowers, unlikely to face a rollover problem,
should not be forced to pay for this irrelevant option. In our view, there is a crucial weakness
in relying solely on market forces to produce voluntary rollover schemes (VDROPS) or
analogous arrangements such as those discussed below.
If borrowers differ in the likelihood that they would invoke the option in times of orderly
markets, then safer borrowers might try to signal their type by asking for loans without the
rollover option. Refusing the option would become necessary to be judged credit worthy. This

20 For a more positive view of the IMF=s role and performance, see Fischer [1998]. Brealey
[1999] contains a wide-ranging discussion of the strengths and weaknesses if IMF operations.
15

could limit or destroy the effectiveness of any voluntary, market-based scheme. This may be the
key reason why the reason the markets have not produced any significant amount of VDROPs.
The negative consequences of adverse selection can be mitigated by mandating. This is well
known from other areas of insurance where adverse selection is a problem, such as health
insurance. UDROP falls squarely in that tradition.
There have already been some plans similar to what we propose. Argentina and
Mexico have schemes where the country pays a commitment fee to foreign banks in return for
the right to draw upon a foreign-currency facility over a specified time period. This is similar to
a foreign-currency overdraft facility or credit line and is a (voluntary) option to borrow foreign
currency.21 The Argentine central bank and a group of 14 international banks agreed upon a
Contingent Repo Program. This gives the central bank the option to sell certain domestic assets
for US dollars subject to a repurchase clause. In 1995, Mexico arranged a contingent-loan
facility with a group of international banks. Indonesia arranged stand-by facilities three times
during the period 1995-1997 and made drawings totaling $1.5 billion on two occasions.
In a similar spirit, in May 1998 the Shadow Financial Regulatory Committee proposed
that a haircut be imposed on foreign-currency creditors who refuse to roll over their loans to
countries who have been granted IMF emergency lending.22 IMF emergency lending should

21 From Eichengreen [1998], we quote the following information on these credit lines.
Argentina agreed a contingent repurchase facility with 13 commercial banks, which provides for
$ 7 billion in standby credits. Mexico has an arrangement with 31 commercial banks which
provides for $ 2.5 billion in facilities. The Argentine Central Bank can swap Argentine
Government securities for U.S. dollars up to the specified ceiling, at an effective interest rate of
Libor plus 205 basis points. The commitment fee is 33 basis points. Loan length is two to five
years, depending on the commercial bank involved. These agreements omit the no-adversematerial-change clause that would otherwise permit banks to back out of their agreement in the
event of a crisis.
22 See Litan [1998].
16

be made conditional on borrowing countries having a mechanism that imposes a financial penalty
(the haircut) on creditors who refuse to roll over their credit. The haircut does not apply if the
creditors roll over their loans at no higher rate of interest until the IMF loan is paid back. We
view this proposal as inadequate for dealing with liquidity crises that often erupt with very little
notice. If one had to wait until an IMF loan (presumably with an IMF program and associated
conditionality attached) was agreed, the damage would already be done. The rollover
mechanism has to be automatic. It should be activated at the discretion of the borrower, without
any need for time-consuming interventions and assessments by international agencies or national
central banks. The pure UDROP proposal satisfies these criteria. The UDROP with central
bank determination of national disorderly market conditions comes close.
The main problem with these voluntary rollover facilities or credit lines is that they are
few and far between. Where they have been arranged, they have covered only a small fraction
of the foreign-currency debt potentially subject to rollover problems. No doubt the adverse
selection problem already referred to is one cause for the market=s under-provision of rollover
insurance.
It is easy to overstate the cost of our scheme to credit-worthy borrowers (and even to
those who are both credit worthy and confident of never being caught in a rollover crunch).
Creditworthy borrowers who are perceived as certain never to exercise the rollover option
would not be hurt by the obligation to buy it. An option that will never be exercised has a price
of zero. Of course, a borrower’s credit worthiness may be his private information, but as we
mentioned before, if a country has sensible debtor-creditor laws and an efficient judicial system,
collateral may be used to overcome the associated adverse-selection problem. If some
countries= country’s legal systems are inefficient, we consider the costs due to adverse selection
to be a price worth paying if the alternative is the unnecessary liquidity crunches that periodically
17

damage the world economy.
The introduction of UDROPs is likely to discourage some intermediation and we believe
this is a good thing. If there is considerable nervousness about the possibility of an international
credit crunch, rollover options would be expensive. This would discourage inappropriate
intermediation that might have occurred if market participants had not been forced to take a
hard look at the risks.
Most market participants are opposed to rule-bound universality of any kind, including
our proposal that UDROPs be made universal. The US Secretary of the Treasury, Mr. Rudin,
appears singularly reluctant to contemplate the relevant legislation. Against that, the UK
Chancellor of the Exchequer and many of the continental European authorities favour rule-bound
universality of some kind. Market opposition can partly be attributed to the belief held by
virtually every player, that he will be able to outsmart the market as a whole and get his money
out before a liquidity crunch bites. They cannot all be right. Second, despite the recent serious
losses, many private participants have done rather well out of the current arrangements, as
beneficiaries of large resource transfers from the global tax payer, intermediated through the
international financial institutions and through bilateral or multilateral government support. There
are legal and administrative costs associated with out proposal, and there may be an element
of redistribution (from borrowers whose likelihood of invoking the rollover option is
overestimated by the market to borrowers for whom it is underestimated). We believe these
to be minor compared to the costs of liquidity crises. Politicians therefore should not pay so
much heed to the objections of ‘the markets’. Every player speaks just for himself. No-one
speaks for the system. Our proposal does.
III.5 How can we put the U in UDROP?
If it is indeed desirable that the rollover option be universal, how could it be made legally so?
18

The legal issue could be resolved at the national level if governments were to declare any
foreign-currency debt contracts without a rollover option to be illegal, and non-enforceable. To
encourage countries to impose such a legal clause, the IMF could refuse assistance to countries
not requiring UDROP. Even better would be an agreement among all IMF members that
foreign currency-debt contracts without the option would be unenforceable in any member’s
courts. This would also help resolve a problem, discussed at greater length in Section III.5, that
arises when borrowers, lenders and other market participants engage in dynamic hedging
strategies, buying and selling rollover options and other contingent claims, in an attempt to
escape the UDROP obligation.
Derivative securities like UDROPs tend to be traded on over-the-counter markets,
where reporting requirements are all but nonexistent. Neither do corporates with positions in
these securities have to report their positions. The authorities are most unlikely to have the
technical expertise to follow the money. By making all foreign currency liabilities (including
contingent claims) non-enforceable unless they have a rollover option attached, the money will
follow the authorities. Lenders will not lend without the rollover option.
III.6 Could the rollover option be strippable?
While under our proposal every foreign-currency loan would come with a rollover
option, it might be efficient to allow the option to be stripped from the associated debt and to
be traded separately. While borrowers would not be permitted to sell the right to roll over their
debt, the obligation to provide the funds to finance the rollover could be traded by the creditor
(either the original creditor or the party to whom the debt instrument has subsequently been
sold).
We believe it to be essential that the creditor at the moment the option is exercised, is
also the party that has the obligation to roll over the debt. This would ensure that, as far as a
19

debtor caught in a rollover crisis is concerned, the funds to finance the rollover would indeed
be there: the maturity of the existing debt would simply be extended. The creditors could,
however, avail themselves of private rollover re-insurance. There is no compelling reason for
insisting that lending and insurance be provided by the same financial intermediary, as long as
it is clear that, should the counterparty in the re-insurance market fail, the obligation to roll over
the debt stays with (or reverts to) the party who is the creditor at the moment the option is
exercised. UDROP might be ineffective if borrowers had to chase down the purchaser of the
option to receive an extension.
Unbundling the loan and the rollover option has two interesting potential consequences.
The first is that one has to deal with the ‘dynamic hedging critique’, according to which a
borrower could undo the effect of the mandatory rollover insurance by subsequent trading in
contingent claims. For instance, the borrower, while dutifully holding the rollover option on his
debt (that is, holding a long position in rollovers bundled with his debt), could, if rollover options
were created and traded separately, go short in the unbundled rollover option (buy the option
back in the market or write an option himself), thus ending up with a zero or even a negative net
rollover position.23 However, the UDROP proposal is designed to make it impossible for
foreign currency borrowers to get rid of their right to roll over their foreign currency liabilities
through any dynamic hedging strategy. Two features of the UDROP proposal ensure that a
borrower cannot be forced into default either on his original loan or on any contingent liabilities
acquired as part of a dynamic hedging strategy.

23 Barry Eichengreen, who articulated this concern to us, noted that this argument is directly
analogous to the ‘dynamic hedging critique’ of the idea that emerging markets can insure themselves
against crises by prenegotiating commercial credit lines. Dynamic hedging refers to an investment
strategy where hedges are adjusted over time. For instance, currency risk can be hedged by taking
a short position in the currency of the security. If this short position changes over time, the hedging
strategy is dynamic.
20

The first is that the rollover option is specific (an obligation by the creditor to roll over,
at a specific date, a given amount of foreign currency debt issued by a specific, named
borrower) and has seniority or priority over other obligations incurred by the borrower. This
ensures that the borrower cannot be forced into default on his original loan.
The second reason is that if the borrower were to buy back in the market, the obligation
to roll over the loan, he would incur an additional (contingent) foreign currency liability. The
UDROP proposal applies to all foreign currency obligations, including contingent foreign
currency obligations such as the rollover option. The borrower would therefore have to obtain
a ‘second tier’ UDROP for the ‘first tier’ UDROP he just acquired. Clearly, if the amount of
‘second tier’ rollover insurance the borrower had to purchase were limited to the value of the
‘first tier’ option, he would still not be able to meet his obligation if the original, ‘first tier’
UDROP he bought back in the market, were to be exercised. The borrower would default on
the ‘first tier’ option rather than on the original loan. Our proposal is therefore that the amount
of rollover insurance required for a contingent claim would be the total exposure in the event the
contingent claim is exercised. This would prevent default on the ‘first tier’ option bought back
by the borrower, as well as on the original loan. Under our proposal therefore, the borrower
who buys back the UDROP from the lender (or from the market) is required to purchase
another option to roll over a foreign currency liability of the same magnitude as his initial loan.
That ‘second tier’ option could be exercised only if the ‘first tier’ option were exercised. The
borrower would therefore be in the same position as he would have been had he not bought
back the ‘first tier’ option. If there are any transaction costs, no borrower will buy back the
‘first tier’ option.
These two features of our proposal therefore address the concern that borrowers

21

would be tempted to buy back the option themselves and that we would then be back in the
same boat as we started, without UDROPs.
Consider the following example. Ruritania obtains a foreign currency loan from
Megabank Inc, with a rollover option attached to the loan. The option gets stripped and
Ruritania buys it back in the market. Note that, according to our scheme, it is “contractually
clear, that it is the holder of the foreign currency credit at the time the option is exercised,
who is obliged to roll over the debt. It would be the responsibility of that creditor to try
and re-claim the rollover from the party that has written the rollover option, or to whom
the rollover obligation has subsequently been traded.” Assume there is a rollover crisis.
Ruritania has the right to insist that Megabank Inc. rolls over its debt. Megabank Inc, having
agreed to the rollover, then can go back to Ruritania to try and compel performance by
Ruritania on the option. Ruritania obviously cannot perform and would default on the option,
had it not been required to acquire a ‘second-tier’ UDROP for the full value of the foreign
currency obligation it would have to meet if the ‘first tier’ UDROP were to be exercised.
Ruritania now exercises its ‘second tier’ rollover option. The rollover of the original loan has
taken place, as has the rollover of the original UDROP.
We are in favour of voluntary rollover insurance, in addition to the mandated rollover
insurance embodied in UDROP. The adverse selection argument for mandating rollover
insurance (based on the belief that not demanding the rollover option would be used as a signal
of superior creditworthiness) does not apply to trading in unbundled or general rollover options
as long as, as far as the foreign currency debtor is concerned, the original debt obligation
remains bundled with a rollover option for the full face value of the debt at maturity. The original
bundled option ensures that the creditor cannot compel the debtor to repay a specific loan at
maturity. That feature survives intact regardless of the amount of additional, general, rollover
22

insurance that is written.
The second consequence, already referred to, is that, if the option is unbundled and sold
separately, additional counterparty risk could interfere with the ability of the borrower to
exercise the option, if the party to whom the rollover obligation has been sold were to default.24
The solution to this second potential problem is, again, to make it contractually clear, that it is
the holder of the foreign currency credit at the time the option is exercised, who is obliged to roll
over the debt. It would be the responsibility of that creditor to try and re-claim the rollover from
the party that has written the rollover option, or to whom the rollover obligation has
subsequently been traded.
We agree that the rollover option should be an integral part of the loan and that the
creditor at the moment the option is exercised must be obliged to provide the extension if the
option is exercised. It is also key that foreign currency rollover options be themselves subject
to a further UDROP requirement for the full value at risk if the original option is exercised.
Subject to that, the option could be stripped and traded, with market participants effectively
creating a reinsurance market to spread the risk of UDROPs being exercised.25
III.7 Introducing UDROP
It will probably be necessary to ‘grandfather’ existing foreign-currency loans that do not
have a rollover option attached. UDROPs would then be required only for new foreign
currency borrowing. As long as the stock of outstanding foreign-currency debt without a
rollover option is significant, some liquidity crisis risk will remain. As time passes and
outstanding foreign-currency loans without UDROP mature, this risk will dwindle.

24 We are grateful to Wim Boonstra and Han de Jong for this point.
25 We would expect this reinsurance to be provided by financial institutions for whom the
currency of the original loan is the home currency. For such institutions there is no need for
23

III.8 The IMF’s contingent ‘contagion’ credit line
The UDROP proposal differs from recent IMF proposals for a ‘contagion credit line’,
as reported by Chote [1999], from whom we quote freely. The objectives of the Fund’s
Contingent Credit Lines (CCL) are the same as ours: to protect solvent countries with sound
economic policies from the backwash of financial crises elsewhere. The Fund’s scheme will
operate alongside the IMF’s ‘supplemental reserve facility’, launched in 1997 to provide big
loans quickly to countries facing a catastrophic loss of market confidence. Under the Fund’s
proposal, however, there will be no predetermined sum the debtor country can gain access to
automatically, at a time of its own choosing. Instead the IMF will decide if a country can draw
money from the facility, and how much. A country would normally have access to between 300
percent and 500 percent of its recently increased IMF quota. However, whether a country can
draw at all, and if so, how much, will depend on the country’s policies, the nature of the
potential crisis and the state of the IMF’s finances. With $76 billion in uncommitted resources
and $46 billion available from borrowing agreements, Fund liquidity could easily become
strained if contagion were severe.
Any credit line can create moral hazard: a country with a credit line has less incentive
to maintain sound policies and the Fund may be reluctant to withdraw the facility. The Fund
hopes to avoid this by tough policy conditionality. Policy conditionality for access to the credit
lines fall into four categories. A country wishing to draw on the credit lines is required to satisfy
a ‘critical mass’ of conditions under each heading. The four categories are the following. First,
the country must be pursuing policies so sound they would not normally (in the opinion of the
Fund) be expected to required Fund finance. Second, the country must meet, or be making
good progress towards, international codes of conduct on statistical, monetary, financial and

‘second tier’ UDROPs.
24

fiscal policies. Third, the country must submit a good economic and financial policy programme,
which it must be prepared to adjust if necessary. Fourth, an applicant must have good relations
with private creditors (as evidenced by absence of arrears, negotiation of private sector credit
lines, sensible bond contracts and good management of debt and reserves). To draw on the
credit line, a country must be able to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the IMF, that it is a
victim of contagion: “circumstances largely beyond the control of the member, but stemming
primarily from adverse developments in capital markets and consequent upon development in
other countries”.
Because it is not mandatory, the Fund’s scheme does nothing the alleviate the adverse
selection problem: an application for a credit line might be viewed as a signal by the markets that
the applicant is more likely to be subject to unexpectedly severe debt service and rollover
problems.
In our view this proposal represents a continuation of the Fund’s ‘conditionality as
usual’. It will be inflexible, slow and politicised. The Fund’s case-by-case approach has not
prevented or mitigated rollover crises in the past. There are few grounds for believing things will
be different in the future.

IV. Conclusion
UDROP is meant to address the situation where a large number of people all try to
leave a room simultaneously through a small door, hotly pursuing a limited number of prizes that
will be handed out on a first-come, first-served basis. If it works as we expect it to, it will not
only allow the system to cope better with a rollover crisis when one occurs, it will also reduce
the likelihood and incidence of such crises.
The UDROP proposal is market friendly and does not involve large administrative,
25

regulatory and enforcement costs. There is no need for an independent agency to monitor any
‘trigger’ that would allow the borrower to exercise the option. The option can be exercised by
the borrower when his original loan expires, under any conditions. The penalty ensures that
under normal market conditions, no borrower would choose to exercise the option. It does not
require any commitment of public (bilateral or multilateral) money. In times of crisis all creditors,
private and public, are ‘bailed in’ automatically.
An added benefit of the options is that it would force the market participants, who have
to price these options, to pay serious attention to the prospects of liquidity crises. The
mandatory rollover option would force all market participants to assess and price these risks.
The pricing, under orderly market conditions, of instruments for dealing with disorderly market
conditions will no doubt always be an imperfect science. The cost of not having this international
liquidity insurance in place is however, too high to tolerate.
In the past few centuries, financial markets have fluctuated unpredictably between
periods of orderly market conditions and episodes where herd instinct and collective panic ruled
the roost, liquidity dried up, collateral vanished and asset values collapsed. The harm inflicted
on the real economy by such liquidity crises has been out of proportion to the cost of forcing all
international financial market players to add UDROPs to foreign currency lending and
borrowing.
Professors Merton and Scholes, who may have time on their hands, can derive formulae
for pricing these options, bundled or unbundled. Options traders can deal in them. More
important, it would make a contribution to global financial stability. The alternatives are
continued financial instability, capital controls, foreign exchange controls, taxes on international
capital flows and other costly and inefficient interventions, that invite evasion and corruption.
It seems worth a try.
26

27

Bibliography

Joshua Aizenman [1998], “Capital Mobility in a Second Best World: Moral Hazard with Costly
Financial Intermediation”, NBER Working Paper No. 6703.
Timothy Besley (1994), “How do Market Failures Justify Interventions in Rural
Credit Markets”, World Bank Research Observer 9, January, pp. 27-48.
Richard Brealey [1999], “International Financial Stability”, mimeo, Bank of England,
March.
Willem H. Buiter, Giancarlo Corsetti and Paolo Pesenti [1998a], Financial Markets and
European Monetary Cooperation: The Lessons of the 1992-93 Erm Crisis,
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Willem H. Buiter, Giancarlo Corsetti and Paolo Pesenti [1998b], Interpreting the ERM Crisis:
Country-Specific and Systemic Issues, Princeton Studies in International Finance, No.
84, March.
Ricardo J. Caballero and Arvind Krishnamurthy [1998], “Emerging Market Crises:
An Asset Markets Perspective”, NBER Working Paper No. 6843, December.
Jorge A. Chan-Lau and Zhaohui Chen [1998], “Financial Crises and Credit Crunch as
a Result of Inefficient Financial Intermediation - with reference to the Asian
Financial Crisis”, mimeo, International Monetary Fund.
Roberto Chang and Andres Velasco [1998a], “Financial fragility and the exchange
rate regime”, NBER Working Paper No. 6469, March
Roberto Chang and Andres Velasco [1998b], “Financial crises in emerging markets: a
canonical model”, NBER Working Paper No. 6606, June.
Robert Chote [1999], “IMF’s new ‘contagion’ credit line: would any country really use
it?”, Financial Times, Monday April 26, p. 4.
Harold Cole and Timothy Kehoe [1996], “A self-fulfilling model of Mexico=s 1994debt crisis”, Journal of International Economics, 41, pp. 309-330.
Giancarlo Corsetti, Paolo Pesenti and Nouriel Roubini [1998a], “Paper Tigers? A
Model of the Asian Crisis”, paper presented at the NBER-Bank of Portugal
International Seminar on Macroeconomics, Lisbon, 14-15 June.
Giancarlo Corsetti, Paolo Pesenti and Nouriel Roubini [1998b], “What caused the
Asian Currency and Financial Crisis? Part II: The Policy Debate.” NBER
28

1995

Working Paper No. 6834, December.
Ash Demirguç-Kunt and Enrica Detragiache [1997], “The Determinants of Banking
Evidence from Developing and Developed Countries”, International
Monetary
Working Paper No. 106.

Crises:
Fund

Douglas Diamond [1984], “Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring”,
Review of Economic Studies, LI, pp. 393-414.
Douglas. Diamond and Philip H.. Dybvig [1983], “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance,
Liquidity”,' Journal of Political Economy 91, 1983, 401-419.

and

Rudiger Dornbusch, Ilan Goldfajn and Rodrigo O. Valdes [1995], “Currency
Crises and Collapses”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, pp. 219-270.
Rudiger Dornbusch [1998], “Capital Controls: An Idea Whose Time Is Past”, In S.
et. al. [1998].

Fischer

Philip H. Dybvig [1992], “Bank Runs”, a contribution to The New Palgrave
Dictionary of Money and Finance 1, New York: Stockton Press, 1992, 171173.
Jonathan Eaton [1987], “Public Debt Guarantees and Private Capital Flight” , World
Economic Review, 1 (May 1987): 377-395.

Bank

Jonathan Eaton [1989], “Beyond the Debt Crisis: Alternative Forms of Financing
Growth: Comment”, in Dealing with the Debt Crisis: A World Bank Symposium
edited by Ishrat Hussein and Ishac Diwan. Washington DC: World Bank,
1989.
Barry Eichengreen and Andrew Rose [1998], “Staying Afloat When the Wind Shifts:
Factors and Emerging Markets Banking Crises”, NBER Working
Paper No. 6370.

External

Barry Eichengreen [1998], “Bailing In the Private Sector”, Mimeo, September.
Barry Eichengreen and Richard Portes [1995], “Crisis? What Crisis? Orderly
Workouts for Sovereign Debtors”, CEPR, 1995, pp. i-xviii + 1-34.
Stanley Fischer [1998], “In Defense of the IMF. Specialized Tools for a Specialized
Foreign Affairs, 77(4).

Task”,

Stanley Fischer et. al.[1998], “Should the IMF Pursue Capital-Account
Liberalization?”, Essays in International Finance, No. 207, International
Finance Section, Princeton University, May.
Reuven Glick and Andrew K. Rose [1998], “Contagion and trade: why are currency
29

crises

regional?”, NBER Working Paper No. 6806, November.
Ilan Goldfajnn and Rodrigo O. Valdes [1997], “Capital flows and the twin crises: the
liquidity”, International Monetary Fund Working Paper 97/87, July.

roleof

Morris Goldstein [1998], “The Asian financial crisis: causes, cures and systemic
implications”, Policy Analyses in International Economics No.55, Washington
D.C., Institute for International Economics.
Haizhou Huang and Chenggang Xu [1998], “Financial Institutions, Contagious Risks,
Financial Crises”, Mimeo, London School of Economics.

and

International Monetary Fund [1998], World Economic Outlook and International
Capital Markets, Interim Assessment, December, International Monetary
Fund, Washington D.C.
Graciela L. Kaminsky and Carmen M. Reinhart [1998], “On Crises, Contagion and
Confusion”, Mimeo, December.
Peter B. Kenen (ed.) [1996], “From Halifax to Lyons: what has been done about crisis
management?”, Essays in International Finance No. 200, International
Finance Section, Princeton University, October.
Paul Krugman [1997], “Are Currency Crises Self-Fulfilling?”, NBER Macroeconomics
Annual.
Robert E. Litan [1998], “Does the IMF Have a Future? What Should it Be?”, Paper given
at the IMF/Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Conference on the IMF, October 1998.
Olivier Loisel and Philippe Martin [1999], “Coordination, cooperation, contagion and
currency crises”, CEPR Discussion Paper Series No. 2075, February.
Jeffrey Sachs [1995], “Do We Need an International Lender of Last Resort?”,
presented as Frank D. Graham Lecture at Princeton, April, 1995, forthcoming as
Essays in International Finance.
Jeffrey Sachs [1996], “Alternative Approaches to Financial Crises”, Revista de
Economia Politica, vol 16, no. 2, April-June 1996.
Jeffrey Sachs, Aaron Tornell and Andres Velasco [1996], “Financial Crises in
Emerging Markets: the Lessons of 1995”, Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 1, pp. 147-217.

30

