What Should Be Done About Rising Unemployment in the UK?
Open Lecture by
David Blanchflower, Bruce V. Rauner ‘78 Professor of Economics, Dartmouth College,
University of Stirling, IZA, CESifo, NBER and Member, Monetary Policy Committee, Bank
of England

At the University of Stirling
25 February 2009

Accompanying paper

My thanks to Conall Mac Coille and Helen Lawton for assistance in preparing this speech.
1

All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx

"You take my life when you do take the means whereby I live"
The Merchant of Venice, Act IV, William Shakespeare.
1. INTRODUCTION
It is with great pleasure I come to the University of Stirling in the waning days of my
time on the MPC. I gave an inaugural here almost exactly two years ago on the labour
market. Much has changed since then. Many of the ideas I will discuss tonight are
drawn from a joint paper written with David Bell that is being released by
SCOTECON tonight.

The UK economy is in dire straits.

In the final quarter of 2008 GDP growth

contracted by 1.5%, the sharpest rate of decline since 1980. Survey measures of
economic activity indicate that output is likely to continue contracting through the
first half of 2009 at least. A range of macroeconomic forecasters now expect that
2009 will be the sharpest contraction of the UK economy in the post-war period.

In the three months to December ILO unemployment was close to 2 million people its highest level for 10 years. And since the beginning of 2009 there has been a stream
of redundancies across a wide range of firms. At the same time the graduation of the
high school and university classes of 2009 grows closer, threatening further increases
in the pool of unemployed labour.

In this speech I will discuss potential measures to address rising unemployment. In
past recessions rising long-term unemployment had a persistent adverse effect on the
supply potential of the economy. Fiscal measures to sustain employment may also be
an important part of the overall macroeconomic policy response to the credit crisis.
First though I will discuss the overall macroeconomic context of rising
unemployment.

2. WHERE ARE WE NOW? AND WHERE ARE WE GOING?

How long is the downturn likely to last? In my last speech at the University of
Nottingham I highlighted that economists typically tend to under-predict the length

and depth of recessions1. Recent recessions have typically been associated with five
quarters of negative output growth and financial crises tend to have particularly severe
consequences.

Chart 1 illustrates a set of Consensus forecasts around the time of the last recession.
Here each coloured line represents a stream of forecasts for a particular calendar year.
If we focus on the projections for 1991 (the pink line) we can see forecasters initially
predicted GDP growth would be over 2 per cent but the final outturn ended up being
around minus 2 per cent. However, even when economists had been consistently
surprised by the depth of the recession in 1991, they failed to realise that growth
would continue to contract in 1992 (the green line), but then became so pessimistic
that they failed to appreciate the strength of the upturn in 1993 and 1994.

This financial crisis is certainly the worst in my lifetime. We must consider the
plausible possibility, as Sir John Gieve noted in his speech last week at the London
School of Economics, that the recession may be more protracted than those recessions
that occurred in recent decades2. Some commentators have characterised the
surprising severity of the recession as reflecting a stream of unexpected events in the
financial sector. For example, amongst many other events, the collapse of Northern
Rock and Bear Stearns, government interventions in Fannie and Freddie Mac and the
AIG insurance group, and the bankruptcy of the Lehman Brothers investment bank.

I find these arguments tenuous at best. The collapse of Lehman Brothers was clearly a
symptom, not the cause of the credit crisis. It is hard to imagine a counter-factual in
which the Lehman Brothers investment bank might have been propped up at the last
minute by public funds, and global confidence in the financial sector would have been
markedly better. Rather, a realisation of the magnitude of the underlying problems in
the financial sector, leading to adverse effects on confidence, spending and
investment intentions was always likely, and sooner rather than later. Clearly
policymakers did not come to a realisation of the problems in the financial sector
quickly enough.

1

David Blanchflower, ‘Macroeconomic Policy Responses in the UK’, Notthingham University,
Thursday 29th January 2009.
2
John Gieve, ‘Seven lessons from the last three years’, London School of Economics, Thursday 19th
February 2009.

2

Concentrating on these events abstracts from a proper appreciation of the underlying
causes of the recession. Perhaps it is this habit that leads so many macroeconomic
forecasters during recessions to assume that the adverse shocks to economic activity
have largely passed and will dissipate going forward. Hence, using some
macroeconomic model, they extrapolate that growth will return to its trend or average
rate more quickly than it actually does. Few forecasters expect the underlying shocks
to activity, and our responses to them, to intensify. Every bad data release is treated
as the trough and the next quarter is forecast to be better, but it isn't. Initial projections
for a ‘V-shaped’ recovery are then revised to a ‘U-shape’ and as optimism turns to
pessimism, eventually to an ‘L-shape’ just as the recovery arrives.

This experience suggests we must not be overly optimistic. Hence, The Bank of
England’s February Inflation Report central projections are for growth to begin
recovering by 2010 (Chart 2) but also include, within the fan-chart, the possibility that
annual GDP growth will remain negative through 2010. The risks to the central
projection are clearly weighted to the downside.

Commensurate with the problems in the financial sector there have been significant
macroeconomic policy responses, both fiscal and monetary. In the UK the Bank Rate
has been cut by 400 basis points. But the size of this response must be set against
overall conditions in financial markets and credit availability. That is, the
transmission of monetary policy has been impaired. Cuts in Bank Rate have not been
fully passed through to the rates faced by households and firms in servicing their
debts. Overall credit conditions have tightened since the autumn.

Ultimately, the medium term prospects for the economy are dependent on a healthy
financial system to channel our savings into the most productive investments. To this
end a range of public policy initiatives have been announced to restore more normal
conditions to financial markets, and ensure that lending to households and firms
improves. For example, these measures include steps to reduce uncertainty about
banks’ capital adequacy, by providing insurance against future losses from holdings
of risky assets.

3

I certainly hope these measures will work and allow the UK economy to gradually
recover. However, the risks of a protracted recession are clearly evident. It may take
longer than expected for policy initiatives to restore more normal lending conditions
in financial markets. Additional policy initiatives may be required if conditions
continue to deteriorate within the financial sector. The possibility of further
unexpected events cannot be ruled out. Alternatively, the more general downturn in
the British economy might have a more negative impact on the financial sector than
we expect.
Hence, a second risk relates to the rising level of unemployment in the economy3. As
redundancies rise and house prices fall, more British households will face the grim
prospect of experiencing both unemployment and negative equity in their homes.
Forced selling in the housing market could lead to further downward pressure on
house prices, pushing more household’s into negative equity and reducing the amount
of collateral they have to secure their mortgages against. In this case mortgage arrears
and defaults will rise, putting further pressure on the financial sector. Such a scenario
would lend a new dynamic to the existing vicious circle of falling house and asset
prices and reduced credit availability. These are plausible possibilities we must
consider.

How bad will the downturn in the labour market be? In past recessions the rise in
unemployment has been persistent and lagging the contraction in output. Survey
measures of current economic activity, confidence and investment and employment
intentions remain close to historic lows. For example, the REC Demand for Staff
Survey and the CIPS and BCC employment intentions surveys have continued to fall
back in the most recent data (see Charts 3-5). In a recent survey by the Bank of
England’s Regional Agents, many contacts suggested that their next stage of
adjustment to weaker demand could involve more substantial job cuts.

3

Even two years ago I noted that the labour market was loosening "In my view, the labour market for
the UK, as a whole, has continued to loosen over the past twelve months or so. Labour demand has
remained firm or picked-up in many sectors, but on the whole has not kept pace with the additional
supply. Consequently, while employment has risen, so too has the degree of slack in the labour
market." David Blanchflower 'Recent developments in the UK labour market' speech given at the
University of Stirling, 26th February 2007.

4

The deterioration in employment prospects is being felt in muted wage growth. Both
the AEI and AWE measures of wage growth have fallen back sharply (Chart 6). In a
survey conducted by the Bank’s Regional Agents, more than a third of respondents
(weighted by the number of their employees) suggested that they were considering
pay freezes (Chart 7). At the same time, sharp reductions in bonus payments will push
down on overall wages and salaries growth in 2009.

As nominal wage growth retreats in 2009 this will add to the broader degree of disinflationary pressure within the economy. Annual CPI inflation has already fallen
sharply from its peak of 5.2% in September to 3.0% in the latest release. Falling oil,
commodity and input prices will push down on firms’ costs. And as the degree of
spare capacity within the economy widens, firms will be more likely to cut their
consumer prices to maintain market share. In the February Inflation Report CPI
inflation is expected to fall back to well below the 2.0% target and the fan indicates
that there is a possibility that CPI inflation may fall below zero (Chart 8).

So the MPC must consider the risk that the UK may experience deflation. Of course,
some measures of retail price inflation which include house prices or mortgage
interest payments are very likely to move into negative territory. This raises serious
questions regarding whether the CPI inflation target is the correct measure of inflation
for the MPC to consider.

I echo the comments by my colleague Sir John Gieve that setting a target for a
measure of consumer price inflation that excludes the costs of home ownership has
done us no favours.4 How might monetary policy have been set differently had house
prices been included in the index? Interest rates might have been increased more
quickly as the house price boom began, and have been cut more quickly as house
prices began to fall.

Measures of inflation that include the costs of home ownership have the advantage of
including a larger basket of goods than in the CPI. House prices are also the most
important asset price for many households, as it is the price of their home that
4

John Gieve, ‘Seven lessons from the last three years’, London School of Economics, Thursday 19th
February 2009.

5

households secure their mortgages against. The large boom in house prices meant
households were able to obtain ever more favourable mortgages relative to the Bank
Rate as their loan to value (LTV) ratios fell. And the rise in house prices also reflected
financial institutions lending ever greater multiples of the incomes of first time
buyers.

The MPC considered these effects in their policy decisions when targeting CPI, but
not sufficiently. Because house prices are so intimately linked to developments in
credit markets there are advantages in explicitly including house prices in the target
the MPC considers in setting monetary policy.

3. MACROECONOMIC POLICY RESPONSES
The current recession reflects more than just cyclical movements in consumer
spending or investment. Rather the UK economy has been hit by the greatest financial
crisis of our lifetimes. In the medium term the prospects for the UK will be dependent
on a healthy financial sector. Unless the problems in the financial sector can be
successfully addressed, growth in the UK economy is unlikely to return to its potential
rate in the near future.

Furthermore, conventional monetary and fiscal policy stimuli can only provide an
accommodative background for the structural adjustments within the financial sector
to take place. They cannot solve them per se. This has been more than evident as a
range of initiatives, such as the bank recapitalisation scheme, have been necessary to
prevent the collapse of the UK financial sector.

We need to clearly identify the structural problems in the financial sector and solve
them. In short, a large part of our financial infrastructure remains dysfunctional
because of the difficulties in valuing complex assets and derivatives, for which there
is little investor appetite as a re-appraisal of risk is taking place within the global
economy. That these assets remain on banks’ balance sheets has increased uncertainty
about our banks’ capital adequacy and remains a barrier to private investment.

A range of solutions have been proposed to solve this problem. For example, public
purchases of ‘troubled’ assets, the creation of a ‘bad bank’ to purchase ‘troubled’

6

assets from financial institutions and finally outright nationalisation of our banks. In
the UK we have concentrated on providing insurance against future losses from these
assets, amongst other measures, to improve confidence in the capital adequacy of our
banks. But it is possible further action may be necessary to bolster confidence in our
financial institutions.

Indeed, further falls in asset and house prices will raise questions regarding the capital
adequacy of the financial sector. Ben Bernanke has suggested in the US context that
‘efforts to reduce preventable foreclosures, among other benefits, could strengthen
the housing market and reduce mortgage losses, thereby increasing financial
stability’5. Alternatively, public policy initiatives focused on maintaining employment
and stimulating the economy more generally may help to prevent a new round of
falling house prices and constrained credit.

In this vein the Bank of England is planning to engage in measures to maintain the
flow of lending within the economy. Under the Asset Purchase Facility (APF) the
Bank of England has the ability to buy a range of assets to provide an effective
stimulus to the economy as an instrument of monetary policy. These assets include
commercial paper, corporate bonds and similar securities. The aim is to reduce the
cost of finance for firms by providing liquidity to the market and encouraging debt
issuance. The MPC have agreed that the Governor Mervyn King will write on its
behalf to the Chancellor to seek authority to conduct purchases of government and
other securities, financed by the creation of central bank money, using the APF.

These measures are intended to improve conditions in money markets. But it may be
some time before there is a marked improvement in overall credit availability. This
could imply there is now a case for a large fiscal stimulus, concentrated on
employment, to allow time for the adjustment within the financial sector absent of a
downward spiral of house prices and negative equity. Indeed, the impairment of
monetary policy raises questions about the appropriate policy mix between fiscal and
monetary tools to stimulate the economy. Many commentators have noted that the
distinction between fiscal and monetary policy becomes blurred as interest rates move

5

Ben Bernanke ‘The Crisis and the Policy Response’, Stamp Lecture, London School of Economics,
January 13th 2009.

7

closer to the zero bound and central banks engage in policies labelled as quantitative
easing.
In the United States context Professor Martin Feldstein has commented:6

“It has become clear that the current downturn is different from
previous recessions and that monetary policy would not be effective in
bringing us back to full employment.”

Similarly, the San Francisco Federal Reserve Chairman, and distinguished economist,
Janet Yellen has commented that:7

“In ordinary circumstances, there are good reasons why monetary,
rather than fiscal, policy should be used for stabilization purposes. But
we are in extraordinary circumstances, and the case for substantial
fiscal stimulus over the next few years is very strong. First, as I have
indicated, with the economy contracting significantly, it is time to
“pull out all the stops”—that is, to deploy both monetary and fiscal
policy—to avoid a deep and lingering recession. Second, the case for
fiscal stimulus is strengthened by the fact that monetary policy has
already moved its short-term interest rate essentially to zero.”

Of course, we are largely returning to the ideas attributed to Keynes. That is, when
monetary policy becomes ineffective because financial markets have become
dysfunctional, it is left to fiscal policy to provide an effective stimulus to the
economy. That said, I would echo Ben Bernanke’s view that:

“Fiscal policy can stimulate economic activity, but a sustained
recovery will also require a comprehensive plan to stabilize the
financial system and restore normal flows of credit.”

6

M. Feldstein (2009), ‘Rethinking the role of fiscal policy’, NBER Working Paper #14684.
J. Yellen (2009) ‘The Outlook for 2009: Economic Turmoil and Policy Responses’ Presentation to the
Financial Women’s Association, San Francisco, CA, January 15, 2009
7

8

In the US the planned fiscal stimulus of just under $800bn, currently being
implemented by President Obama’s administration, is planned provide around 4
million jobs. In the context of the UK this would be comparable to a stimulus of
around £90bn or 750,000 jobs.

It is clear that the UK is now taking action on both fronts, monetary and fiscal, to
stimulate the economy and solve the specific problems in the financial sector. I will
not speculate on the size of the fiscal stimulus that is being planned in the budget.
Rather, I would like to discuss how any fiscal stimulus that is being planned can be
best focused on the labour market with the goal of sustaining employment.

4. THE COSTS OF HIGHER UNEMPLOYMENT
In the three months to December the deterioration in labour market conditions
continued. Employment fell by 45,000 in the final quarter of the year. In the final
quarter of 2008 the unemployment rate stood at 6.3%, its highest rate since 1998.
There are now almost 2 million persons unemployed in the UK.

Chart 9, taken from the Bank of England’s Regional Agents monthly report of
business conditions, illustrates the deterioration in labour market conditions through
2008. Early in the year, a broad range of firms across each sector of the economy had
already begun to cease net recruitment of employees. As the year progressed and
economic conditions deteriorated, an increasing range of firms have considered
significant cuts in their employment.

The very latest survey measures of firms’ employment intentions continue to
deteriorate to historic lows. Indeed, the media have reported large employment
reductions planned for a range of firms in the UK. In my view the unemployment rate
is set to rise further, probably to close to 10.0% by the end of 2009. This could imply
there will be over three million unemployed by 2010. The ITEM club predicts that
overall UK unemployment will reach 3.4 million in 2011.

9

The fear of unemployment continues to rise sharply (see Chart 10)8. Here the fear of
unemployment is the survey balance of respondents’ views on what they expect to
happen to unemployment over the following 12 months. The series started to rise
inexorably from July 2007, and the rise is especially evident from August 2008. The
employment expectations of firms, on a whole variety of measures, had also
deteriorated markedly from April/May 2008.

In past recessions the deterioration in labour market conditions has been severe,
typically lagging the contraction in actual economic output, and then taking a number
of years before unemployment begins to fall back. This time around there is some
limited evidence (it is too early to say for sure) that the reduction in employment may
have followed the contraction in output more quickly than usual (Chart 11). The chart
also shows how big a deviation from trend we have experienced. This could imply
that employment will pick-up more quickly when the recovery in output emerges. But
this is far from certain, so we must not be complacent. As for economic output,
Reinhart and Rogoff (2008) find the rise in unemployment tends to be particularly
severe during financial crises9.

Rising unemployment may lead to a reduction in the supply capacity of the economy.
If workers remain unemployed for sustained periods they may lose their skills, thus
reducing their human capital. High rates of long-term unemployment in the economy
may mean there is a mismatch between those skills that workers possess, and those
for which there is demand. People may also be less likely to participate in the labour
market the longer their spell of unemployment persists.

Unemployment has undeniably adverse effects on those unfortunate to experience it.
A range of evidence indicates that unemployment tends to be associated with
malnutrition, illness, mental stress, depression, increases in the suicide rate, poor
physical health in later life and reductions in life expectancy. However, there is also a
wider social aspect. Many studies find a strong relationship between crime rates and

8

For more on the fear of unemployment see D.G. Blanchflower and C. Shadforth (2009), 'Fear,
Unemployment and Migration', forthcoming in the Economic Journal
9

C.M. Reinhart and K.S. Rogoff (2009), ‘The aftermath of financial crises’, NBER Working Paper
#14656.

10

unemployment, particularly for property crime. Sustained unemployment while
young, especially of long duration, is especially damaging. By preventing labour
market entrants from gaining a foothold in employment, sustained youth
unemployment may reduce their productivity. Those that suffer youth unemployment
tend to have lower incomes and poorer labour market experiences in later decades.10
Unemployment while young creates permanent scars rather than temporary blemishes.

To take just one example from the literature, Gregg and Tominey (2005) found that
the wages of those who experience youth unemployment are 13%-21% lower than
they otherwise would have been, after taking account of a range of other influences
such as education, family background and other personal characteristics.11 Many
studies find the costs of youth unemployment are greater, in terms of labour market
prospects and overall well being, than for those who experience unemployment later
in life. One explanation is that young labour market entrants who fail to gain a
foothold in employment do not develop their skills during a key time in their
development.

One third of the increase in unemployment since the beginning of 2008 is accounted
for by those aged 18-24 years. Of the 1.97 million persons unemployed in the UK in
the final quarter of last year, 807,000 were aged between 16-24 years. In fact, rising
youth unemployment has been a growing problem for some time in the UK. The UK
unemployment rate for those aged 18-24 years has risen from 10.6% in 2000 to 14.5%
in the final three months of 2008, in contrast to the international trend of falling youth
unemployment rates (Chart 12).

One explanation for this longer run trend of rising UK youth unemployment is the
bulge in the population of that age (Chart 13). The share of those aged between 16-24
years within the total population has increased from 10.8% in 2000 to 12.1% in 2007.
As the numbers of young people leaving education has increased, the extra numbers
may have led to a squeeze in employment prospects for that cohort. However, the
numbers of teenagers entering the labour market or higher education is likely to fall,
by around 50,000 per year, in the near future.
10

See P.A. Gregg and E. Tominey (2005), 'The wage scar from male youth unemployment', Labour
Economics, 12, pp. 487-509 or W. Arulampalam (2001), 'Is unemployment really scarring? Effects of
unemployment experiences on wages', Economic Journal, (111), November, pp: F585-F606.
11
This penalty was lower at 9%-11% if repeat exposure to unemployment was avoided.

11

Media attention is understandably largely focused on large-scale redundancies within
prominent firms, which leads to increases in unemployment for the older cohorts.
However, it is the dramatically reduced employment opportunities for the classes of
2008, 2009 and 2010 that will largely push up on both aggregate and youth
unemployment rates. Indeed, youth unemployment rates tend to be more sensitive to
the economic cycle. That is, when there are less jobs available, younger inexperienced
workers and new labour market entrants are most likely to lose out.

5. INTERVENING IN THE LABOUR MARKET

What should we do about rising unemployment?

There has been a range of approaches to address rising or long-term unemployment in
the past. First, passive policies such as automatic cash payments to the unemployed.
Second, active labour market programs (ALMPs) to improve both the supply and
demand for labour. Supply-side measures have included training schemes, providing
job seekers with information and guidance on how to find employment, providing
services to match job seekers with existing vacancies, and implementing sanctions
and incentives to encourage job seekers to find employment. Policies to improve
labour demand include subsidies for employers to maintain, or increase their
employment, in addition to job creation schemes.

Within the UK government’s overall expenditure on labour market initiatives a high
proportion is spent on ALMPs, reflecting a view among policy makers that they are at
least partially effective. Assessing the effectiveness of these schemes has become a
cottage industry within the academic community. ALMPs have been subject to more
rigorous scrutiny than most economic policies. That said, care must be taken in
generalising from such studies. The results may be specific to particular groups within
the population, the long-run results may differ from the short-run, differences in
institutional structures may reduce the applicability of studies from one country to
another, and the evaluations themselves rarely take account of the general equilibrium
consequences of policy intervention.

12

Nevertheless, most studies, from a large range of countries, indicate there are little
apparent tangible returns from ALMPs. Asked by The Economist in 1996 how much
training schemes in the US help their clientele, Jim Heckman replied that "zero is not
a bad number’ (The Economist 6th April, 1996). In the UK, large-scale programs such
as YOP and YTS, which provided large-scale subsidised employment were largely
ineffectual. In fact, Dolton et al (1994) found that YTS lowered the probability of
subsequent employment. Green et al (1996) found that YTS had a negative effect on
the subsequent incomes of those on the scheme.12

In contrast to the international trend of poor evaluations of ALMPs, there have been
more positive results from evaluations of recent initiatives in the UK. The New Deal
for Young People (NDYP) was established in 1998 aimed at people aged 18 to 24.
Since the introduction of the NDYP, a range of other New Deal programmes have
been established aimed at improving the employment prospects of specific groups.
Blundell et al (2001) found that participation in the NDYP raised the probability of
employment by around 5% in the short-run. Recent evaluations of the NDYP have
been the most positive, consistent with a continuing process of improvement in
implementation and delivery. For example, Beale, Bloss and Thomas (2008) suggest
that those who participated in the New Deal for Loan Parents (NDLP) scheme spent
64 days less on average on benefits than similar individuals who did not join the
NDLP programme.13

So recent labour market interventions in the UK appear to have achieved some
success. However, the positive findings for the NDYP are drawn from a period, 19982007, when unemployment rates averaged below 6%. A key ingredient in their
success was buoyant labour demand within the UK economy. Past positive
evaluations of the NDYP (and related schemes) do not imply these programs are
likely to have a material effect during a recession when vacancies dry up and
redundancies rise. ALMPs will have to be supported by other labour market policies,

12

Dolton, P., G. Makepeace and J. Treble (1994), ‘The Youth Training Scheme and the school-to-work
transition’, Oxford Economic Papers, 46, pp. 629-657. F. Green, M. Hoskings and S. Montgomery,
(1996), ‘The effects of company training, further education and the Youth Training Scheme on the
earnings of young employees’, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 58, pp. 469-488.
13
Blundell , R., Dias, M.C., Meghir , C., Van Reenen, J. (2001) 'Evaluating The Employment Impact
Of A Mandatory Job Search Assistance Program', Institute For Fiscal Studies, WP01/20. Beale, I.,
Bloss, C., and Thomas, A. , (2008) `The Longer-Term Impact Of The New Deal For Young People’,
Department for Work and Pensions Working Paper No 23

13

in particular those to support labour demand, and the broader UK economy if we are
to be successful in addressing rising unemployment.

6. PROPOSALS TO DEAL WITH RISING UNEMPLOYMENT

I would like to outline some proposals. These proposals have not been costed, so they
are intended as options for policymakers to consider. I hope they may be helpful in
starting a national debate on what to do about rising unemployment in general, and
youth unemployment in particular, where the long-run costs may be greatest.
However, as I have argued, these measures are no substitute for guaranteeing the
medium term prospects for the UK economy by addressing the problems in the
financial sector – though these measures may help that adjustment.

i) There should be a substantial short-term fiscal stimulus focused on jobs
If we use the metric of the Obama package that would imply a fiscal stimulus in the
UK of around 90 billion pounds which would translate to creating 750,000 jobs. This
number is a good starting point for discussion.

Tax cuts and reduced National Insurance contributions aimed at the low-paid and the
young would likely provide a stimulus to the economy because these groups tend to
have a high marginal propensity to consume. Similarly, temporarily increasing
unemployment benefits as well as their duration may be appropriate at a time when
there are large-scale redundancies in the economy.

ii) Raise the Education Leaving Age to 18

In the final quarter of 2008 there were 700,000 young people under the age of 18 who
were economically active, and of whom 184,000 were unemployed. In an advanced
society all these youngsters should be in full time education, jobs with significant
elements of education, or training schemes such as apprenticeships.

The OECD has found that the UK is significantly worse than other countries at
improving skills after the age of 18. My own analysis indicates that the proportion of

14

18-24 year olds with no qualifications has changed little since 1993. The Economic
Affairs Committee of the House of Lords recently concluded that:

“Many school leavers in the UK have not acquired the minimum level
of functional numeracy and literacy and social skills necessary to
benefit from apprenticeship training. In our view, the improvement of
levels of functional skills in mathematics and English is fundamental
and should be given much higher priority in schools.”

I agree.

International evidence indicates there are tangible returns from raising the education
leaving age. Oreopoulous (2009) found the introduction of a higher school leaving
age in the US had significant benefits by reducing the school drop-out rate, increasing
college enrolment, and reducing the probability of future unemployment. Those who
were compelled to remain in education were less likely to claim unemployment
benefits and their future incomes were higher. Harmon and Walker (1995) found a
positive effect of 14% on future earnings from school compulsion and Oreopoulos
(2009) an average effect of 12%. Other studies find additional education lowers the
likelihood of committing crime and teen pregnancy, and raises life expectancy.
Additional years of schooling raises happiness.14

To achieve the aim of improving youth education I am not suggesting we need to
employ an army of truant officers to haul unwilling adolescents back to the classroom.
A more subtle approach is required. First and foremost, the way to raise education
standards is to keep existing students in school. There are number of ways to achieve
this. Any new policy to raise the education leaving age would need to be accompanied
by initiatives to widen the range of available courses and training. There could be
some small room for exceptions such as work-based apprenticeships with collegebased training.

14

Oreopoulos, P. (2009), 'Would more compulsory schooling help disadvantaged youth? Evidence
from recent changes to school-leaving laws?', forthcoming in An Economic Perspective on the
Problems of Disadvantaged Youth, edited by Jonathan Gruber, University of Chicago Press and NBER.
Harmon, C. and I. Walker (1995), 'Estimates of the economic return to schooling for the United
Kingdom,' American Economic Review, December, pp. 1278-86.

15

One possibility worth considering is to give students a monetary incentive to stay on
at high school and obtain a qualification. Such a scheme is already in operation in the
UK. The Education Maintenance Allowance (EMA) offers large financial stipends to
children from low-income families for every week of high school they stay beyond
the minimum leaving age. Students that receive the EMA could gain more over their
lifetime than the cost of the EMA itself if the additional schooling generates
reasonable returns. One way of doing this is to increase the leaving age while
continuing to make EMA payments to families with low incomes.

iii) Provide further encouragement for youths to undertake further and higher
education

With unemployment rising sharply, demand for places in higher education is likely to
rise. Indeed, the figures from UCAS earlier this month showed a 7.8% increase in the
number of applications to higher education. Young people who otherwise would have
entered the labour market may decide to delay their entry by participating in higher
education courses and adding to their human capital. Government policy could
attempt to encourage this by providing additional higher education courses.

One interesting way to attempt to increase participation in higher education is to
require that every student go through the post-secondary school application process,
even if they don’t initially intend to go. Recent work in behavioural economics
suggests this could be an effective and cheap way of encouraging students to engage
in higher education. Making it easier to apply and become eligible for student aid
would probably have a similar positive effect.

Monetary incentives for students to participate in higher education may also be
appropriate. With approximately 800,000 people attaining age 18 in the UK, the fall
in student support will act as a major disincentive for applicants from low-income
backgrounds. Targeted support, aimed at increasing take up of foundation degrees
and 2+2 full-time routes could be expanded via selective support mechanisms. More
general types of support, encouraging Higher Education Institutions to increase their
intakes whilst providing more support for those on low incomes (e.g. full grant and
fees) could form the 'top-end' of a package designed to encourage 16-18 year olds to

16

stay on in education as they prepare for Higher Education. These would be temporary
measures.

iv) Expand the number of teacher training places

If youth education is to expand there will have to be an expansion of teacher training.
Conveniently, the number of people considering teaching as a career appears to be
rising. The number of hits on the website of the Training and Development Agency
for Schools (www.teach.co.uk) had increased by almost 35% in the period March to
September 2008, compared with the same period in 2007. In the past the UK has
struggled to attract graduates into the teaching profession. It might well be expedient
for government to take advantage of the current weakness in labour market conditions
and expand teacher training.

v) Job creation through investment in infrastructure with particular emphasis on
shovel ready projects that could can be started quickly

Local authorities, health authorities, universities and housing associations have
construction projects ready to be implemented. As my colleague Kate Barker
suggested in the Financial Times this week, further investment in social housing could
take advantage of spare capacity within the construction sector, where the downturn
has been particularly severe. It is essential that the planning system does not obstruct
such initiatives. It may be necessary to expedite planning processes that hold up major
investments in infrastructure.

vi) Allow public sector and non-profit organisations to fill available vacancies by
providing increased funding for two years
Provide funds directly to public sector organisations such as local authorities, health
authorities and universities to fill the vacancies they have currently. The idea is if the
budget constraint were lifted - at least temporarily - many more teachers, police,
youth workers and social workers could be hired. The second stage would be to have
them prepare claims for further money for short-term job creation with subsidies for
the unemployed and training for the young. A further possibility is to fund public

17

works programs which would have the added bonus of providing work for
unemployed construction workers.

vii) A temporary, limited and targeted expansion of Active Labour Market
Programs
We should avoid the mistakes of the past where large scale costly schemes, such as
YTS and YOPS, failed to have material positive impact on employment prospects.
Nevertheless there may be room for a limited expansion of existing schemes,
particularly for those schemes clearly targeted at the young. It is important these
schemes are piloted carefully and re-evaluated, checking to see if they yield positive
outcomes for participants in the context of an unfavourable labour market. However,
we are only advocating small narrowly focused schemes, not broad-based schemes
such as YTS and YOPS, which were so ineffective in the past.

viii) Provide incentives to encourage the use of short-time working and job sharing;
these might take the form of time limited tax incentives
One possibility suggested to us by Paul Gregg, which I support, would be to
temporarily reduce the ‘hours rules’ for tax credits. Currently, with the exception of
lone parents, people have to work 30 hours to claim tax credits. His suggestion, which
we think is a good one, would be to reduce this to 16 or 20 hours for two years. Some
people will lower their hours of work (e.g. go part-time or share their jobs) to take
advantage of this and so release hours of work for others.

7. CONCLUSIONS
As Bank Rate has been cut towards zero the transmission of monetary policy has
become impaired precisely because of the dysfunction of financial institutions and
money markets. In large part this problem relates to the difficulties in valuing a large
range of complex mortgage backed securities, derivatives and related assets.

To deal with these problems the Bank of England is ready to implement a range of
new measures to support lending to households and firms. However, it is unclear
when overall credit conditions will begin to improve significantly. At a time when
monetary policy is impaired, it may be appropriate for fiscal policy to provide an

18

effective stimulus to the economy. Such a stimulus would provide time for the
appropriate adjustment within the financial sector to occur.

Given the risk of higher unemployment coupled with negative equity in the household
sector, I have argued that any fiscal stimulus should be focused on sustaining labour
demand. In this speech I have discussed past interventions in the labour market which
have met with limited success during recessions. Therefore, I have suggested policies
focused on adding to the human capital of youth, and sustaining labour demand
through shovel-ready infrastructure projects and expanding public sector employment
where appropriate.

19

Chart 2: GDP projection at market interest rates

Chart 1: Consensus forecasts of UK GDP growth
1990
1992
1994
Real Time

% change oya
5

1991
1993
Final Outturns
Zero

4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

Source: Consensus

Source: BoE Inflation Report February 2009

Chart 3: REC survey of demand for staff

Chart 4: BCC employment intentions survey
% balances

Index

40

70

30
20

60

10

50
0

40

-10
Manufacturing

-20

Services

Temporary

no change

-30

Source: REC

Source: BCC

Mar-09

Mar-08

Mar-07

Mar-06

Mar-05

Mar-04

Mar-03

Mar-02

Mar-99

Mar-98

Mar-97

Mar-96

Mar-95

Mar-94

Mar-93

Mar-92

Mar-91

Mar-90

-40
Mar-89

Apr-09

Oct-08

Apr-08

Oct-07

Apr-07

Oct-06

Apr-06

Oct-05

Apr-05

Oct-04

Apr-04

Oct-03

Apr-03

Oct-02

Apr-02

Oct-01

Apr-01

Oct-00

Apr-00

Oct-99

Apr-99

Oct-98

Apr-98

Oct-97

20

Mar-01

Permanent

Mar-00

30

Chart 6: AEI and AWE measures of wage growth

Chart 5: CIPS employment surveys
Index
60

Per cent
8

55

7

AEI

AWE

6

50

5

45

4

40

3

35

Manufacturing

2

Services

1

(a)

60

2008 survey

50

2009 survey
40

30

20

10

0
0 to 1%

1% to 2%

2% to 3%

3% to 4%

>4%

Weighted by employment, excludes firms that were ‘uncertain’ about prospective settlements

Source: BoE Agents' summary of business conditions February 2009

Source: BoE Inflation Report February 2009
2

Jan-09

Jan-08

Chart 8: CPI inflation projection at market interest rates

Percentage of resp onses

(a)

Jan-07

Source: ONS

Chart 7: Expected pay settlements in 2008 and 2009

Pay freeze

Jan-06

Jan-05

Jan-04

Jan-03

Jan-02

Jan-00

Source: CIPS

Jan-01

0

Jul-09

Jul-08

Jul-07

Jul-06

Jul-05

Jul-04

Jul-03

Jul-02

Jul-01

Jul-00

Jul-99

Jul-98

Jul-97

Jul-96

Jul-95

Jul-94

Jul-93

Jul-92

Jul-91

30

Chart 9: Employment decisions being made by firms

Chart 10: UK Fear of Unemployment
Balance
100
80
60
40
20
0
-20
Jan-88
Jan-89
Jan-90
Jan-91
Jan-92
Jan-93
Jan-94
Jan-95
Jan-96
Jan-97
Jan-98
Jan-99
Jan-00
Jan-01
Jan-02
Jan-03
Jan-04
Jan-05
Jan-06
Jan-07
Jan-08
Jan-09

-40

Source: GfK

Source: Bank of England Agents' summary of business conditions, Feb 2009
Chart 11: Unemployment and GDP deviations

Chart 12: Unemployment Rates
%

Unemployment Rate
Deviation of Output from Trend

16
14

15

12

%
Total (rhs)

8

Youth (lhs)

7

10

14

6

8

13

5

6

12

4

4

11

3

10

2

9

1

8

0

2
0
-2
-4
1971

1976

1981

1986

1991

1996

2001

1999

2006

Source: LFS

Source: ONS and Bank calculations
3

2001

2003

2005

2007

Chart 13 : Population by age in 2006
000's
850

800

750

700

650
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

24

Source: ONS Key Population and Vital Statistics 2006

4

