Bank of England
Writing the Path Back to Target
A speech given by Mark Carney, Governor, Bank of
England
At the University of Sheffield Advanced Manufacturing
Research Centre, Sheffield
12th March 2015

Page 2
Writing the Path Back to Target - 12-03-15
Richard Caborn:

Well I was going to say good morning - it's good afternoon,
and welcome to the University of Sheffield Advanced
Manufacturing Research Centre. And, Governor, it's a great
pleasure to have you here. We do welcome you to the AMRC
and hope you're going to give us an interesting speech a little
later on. But thank you very much.
And also, can I say, Governor, thanks for discussing some of
the issues - big issues that are facing business here in
Yorkshire this morning. I think it's time really well spent; I
hope that was the same from yourself.
We're also very proud of what we've been able to achieve on
this site over the last ten years, and that's why I want to
thank Juliette - Juliette Healey, the Adviser to the Bank, for
helping to bring you, Governor, and indeed your colleagues
here today to see exactly what we're doing.
Can I also say thanks to Julia, the staff here - and Chris and
the whole team that's put this together. I must admit putting
a meeting together of this nature has not been easy. We've
had a few health and safety issues, I can assure you. That's
why we've got a big aisle down the middle here, but that's
that.
Well, as I say, we were celebrating the tenth anniversary of
this site last year. Unfortunately, Governor, you weren't able
to be with us that time. But we have been able to hold back
what we would have produced then. We've held that back for
today's meeting - Building Futures, Advanced Manufacturing.
And really it's an history of the AMRC. And I hope with your
intro into that, Governor, it'll be a best seller as well.
But, you know, who would have thought - ten years,
believing that such a transformation could have taken place
on this site, the Orgreave site, the end of the miners' strike
30 years ago as of this year, and the Orgreave coking plant

Page 3
Writing the Path Back to Target - 12-03-15
that was there at the heart of this site and played such a
decisive part in the outcome of a bitterly fought industrial
dispute. And then to the extraction of seven million open
casting, of seven million tonnes of coal in the late '90s, and
indeed, at the turn of the twentieth century it was able to
return this site to economic development.
To this building where we are today, Governor, the Nuclear
AMRC, whose life began with the Queen actually doing the dig
in November 2010, the virtual dig of the sod that started this
building going. And indeed, I think you see the role that this
place will play in - I hope the not too distant future - of the
development of the new era of nuclear power plants - the
small module reactor.
But when I tell you what they can tell you just over ten years
ago - there was one person that didn't believe - I think there
were many people that didn't believe what we were going to
do on this site. And I can remember when Keith and Adrian
and myself were digging that first sod just over ten years
ago, and we were being filmed for the television, and I shall
never forget what the cameraman said. I think the
cameraman reflected what a lot of people were saying,
because I turned to camera and said - this is going to be the
future of engineering; this is going to be a site where
Brearley invented stainless steel just over 100 years ago.
And he said - I shall never forget - in his usual Yorkshire way,
as they do these cameramen, working I think for ITV at that
time. He says - Tha must be bloody joking, Dick. It's a
slagheap.
And I'm talking about a world-beating engineering centre.
Ten years ago. Look what we've got now. Well, we weren't
kidding, and that following ten years, with the inspiration of
Keith Ridgway and his team, his very talented team, we've
actually delivered something I think this nation can be proud
of. Brings together academia and the private sector, not only

Page 4
Writing the Path Back to Target - 12-03-15
to work in partnership, to benefit their own companies and
that is right, but also to start something else - to start
addressing one of the major fault lines, Governor, that we
believe we've got in our economy - that's our
competitiveness.
How do we take ideas through innovation, development and
then to market? How do we make those things in this
country that people want to buy worldwide at the right price?
Well, this book I think tells you just ten short years of the
AMRC, the journey that we've gone through. It also describes
how we can start to achieve a more competitive Britain. How
we can, as you have said many times, Governor, how can we
address the underlying cause of the lack of manufacturing
competitiveness? How can we grow the manufacturing sector
to contribute considerably more than the 11% of GDP that it
is at the moment and become more competitive with the
major countries?
And also - not only were we looking at how we could drive the
competitive stuff, but also how we could address the
weakness of our manufacturing base, but also how we can
repatriate the manufacturing supply chain. And I think one of
the great successes of this site, as you look across the way I think you were referring this morning, Governor, to Rolls
Royce investment into one of the leading edge technology
companies in terms of airspace blades. And that
announcement to investment by Rolls Royce - what, two or
three years ago - actually was welcomed here in this city with
a great load of acclamation.
But I tell you it lasted about 48 hours because then people
were saying - well, where's the skilled labour going to come
from? Where are we going to get the next generation? Well,
we said - the answer is there. We didn't look at the
problems, we said - what are the solutions? And in January
2014 the AMRC opened the first apprentice training centre for

Page 5
Writing the Path Back to Target - 12-03-15
250 apprentices which was owned and run by a red brick
university - the first we believe in this country. Thanks to the
team here, led by John Baragwanath, and the support let me
say - a very active support of our Vice-Chancellor, Keith
Burnett - we built and delivered possibly one of the country's
bet engineer apprentice centres, but with a major difference and I think this is a major difference, Governor - not only
were these young people, some of them from the east end of
the city, going into that apprentice training and come out as
first class artisans, but they would also be given the
opportunity to go on, and who knows, kid off the manor
might come through our apprenticeship trainingship and get a
doctorate in engineering. That is social mobility without the
cost of fees at the end of it as well, which is very attractive
indeed.
But I think it's also important that the lessons we've learnt
from the AMRC model, we're taking that into other areas to
address both our competitiveness and indeed our wealth
creation in this part of the country. And one is to deliver the
Olympic legacy park physical wellbeing, Advanced Wellbeing
Research Centre, which will be commissioned in the next 12
months.
Plans are also in hand to develop and build the hospital of the
future with the partnership of our two universities and
teaching hospital and yes, indeed, the private sector as well.
This emerging innovation district, taking our traditional skills
and knowledge and putting them into a modern setting. And
this is now linking with Manchester, with Leeds and ourselves,
and we are now becoming the heart of that Northern
Powerhouse that many are referring to now.
So it is a great privilege again, Governor, to have you here. I
think to just explain to you how where we've come in this last
ten years - it's all documented there. And if you don't think
we've got a great belief in this area, well I can tell you some

Page 6
Writing the Path Back to Target - 12-03-15
in this room know we have a great ambition, we have a great
dream and that's to get Sheffield United playing Manchester
United in the Premier League in the not too distant future.
Thank you very much for coming, Governor. Juliette.
Applause
Juliette Healey:

Thank you, Richard. So I'm Juliette Healey; I'm the Bank of
England agent for Yorkshire and the Humber. And I'd like to
thank the Advanced Manufacturing Research Centre and the
University of Sheffield for working with us to host this event.
Now as you can see, this isn't a usual event - a usual venue
for a speech, but it is an inspirational one. Not just the
building where we sit now, but the whole of the Advanced
Manufacturing Park. And as a lot of you are aware, every
year here the frontier of science and technology is pushed
further out. And it's those developments which support the
UK's ability to compete with the rest of the world. So it's
fantastic for us to be here right at the heart of all that
innovation.
Now before I introduce the Governor, I should explain particularly for those of you who've not come across a Bank
of England agent before - what Bank of England agents do
and why we have something in common with the Advanced
Manufacturing Park. We're a network of 12 agencies that
span the UK, and our job is to be the ears, the eyes and the
voice of Bank of England policy makers across the nation.
We spend most of our time talking to individual businesses
face to face. I can see quite a few of you in this room. Why?
Because that way the intelligence that we gather is timely, it's
forward-looking, we can explore puzzles in official data, and
we can understand how behaviour is changing. It's always
been a crucial element of Bank of England policy making, but
it's even more important as the world changes and economic

Page 7
Writing the Path Back to Target - 12-03-15
models based on historic data are less of a guide to the
future.
So like the Advanced Manufacturing Park, we really value the
partnership with business. We recognise that there is no
substitute for getting the news about the real economy first
hand from firms. So I'd like to take this opportunity to say
thank you to all of you who take the time to share your
experiences and how your businesses are responding with us.
We really appreciate it.
So thank you very much, and now I would like to introduce
our speaker, the Governor of the Bank of England, Mark
Carney.
Applause
Mark Carney:

Thank you very much, Juliette. Good afternoon, everyone.
Thank you, Richard, for those great remarks, important
remarks. One of the many things I took from them is - this
man is an optimist. Sheffield United beating Man U in the
Premiership - it starts there. More importantly, more to the
point, you along with Keith and Adrian, ten years ago, and
Keith, turning a slagheap, as you say, into this state of the
art facility that is absolutely essential for the competitiveness
of UK manufacturing and shows the way for UK
manufacturing.
And the third way you demonstrated your optimism is - you
said you hoped that I was going to give an interesting
speech. I am a governor of a central bank [laughter], so I
hope you're sitting comfortably.
I am going to talk about, I think, some important issues
though, some important issues that impinge on
competitiveness and our long-term prosperity, from the
perspective of the Bank of England. And obviously we'll have

Page 8
Writing the Path Back to Target - 12-03-15
a chance to have some questions and responses at the end to
get to the heart of your issues.
It is a great pleasure for me to be here and to be in Sheffield
to honour both the role the City of Steel had historically in
forging the industrial foundations of modern Britain, and its
current leadership in promoting advanced manufacturing for
the post-industrial age. This city has been at the forefront of
innovation for hundreds of years, as you know. In the 18th
century, Sheffield revolutionised steelmaking with the
discovery of the crucible steel process, and stainless steel
subsequently. By the mid-19th century, the city represented
almost half of Europe’s steel output. And since then, Sheffield
has remained fleet of foot through hard work and crucially
innovation.
The University of Sheffield’s Advanced Manufacturing
Research Centre is the latest and really the prime example of
that. No one knows better than the people in this room, in
this facility more broadly, that manufacturing needs to
become ever-more productive to prosper in a world of
steadily falling prices and relentless international competition.
As one example, prices for advanced manufacturing products
fell on average by 1 per cent a year in the decade prior to the
crisis.
And they've also dropped steadily to the cost of simpler
manufacturing products - actually 30 per cent over the course
of the last two decades. The ability to do that is a reflection
of superior productivity growth. And it's not just your
customers, but society as a whole that are the beneficiaries of
manufacturing doing much more with less.
The strong recovery of UK manufacturing over the past year with growth stronger than at any point in the decade - is a
testament to this sector’s focus on continual improvement.

Page 9
Writing the Path Back to Target - 12-03-15
As you know and as you contribute, manufacturing punches
well above its weight in spending on R&D. Manufacturing
products R&D has grown by a quarter since the mid-1980s
and currently accounts for over two-thirds of the entire UK
spending on innovation. Advanced manufacturing sectors,
from pharma to auto to aerospace, represent well over half of
this amount.
And such contributions are crucial to UK’s prosperity because
our long-run economic performance hinges on productivity
growth. It's productivity that's the ultimate determinant of
people’s incomes and the capacity of our economy to support
health, wealth and happiness.
Now turning to the Bank of England, the best contribution we
can make to these goals is to promote monetary and financial
stability. And our remit for monetary stability is simple. Our
job is to achieve a 2% rate of growth in CPI inflation. We do
that by setting Bank Rate, which is the fulcrum around which
all interest rates in the economy pivot, and, if necessary, as it
sometimes is, by purchasing assets.
We operate under a framework known as Inflation Targeting,
and over the course of the past two decades, Inflation
Targeting central banks, in the UK and around the world,
have established excellent track records of keeping inflation
from being too high. It’s an approach that in the UK has
brought tangible benefits. It's lowered the volatility of both
inflation and of income growth.
But now the challenge for those central banks around the
world and for the Bank of England is that we're being tested
by inflation that is too low. And so what I want to
concentrate on today is to discuss the consequences for the
UK of persistently low global inflation - why it matters, and
what the Bank of England can do about it, in order that

Page 10
Writing the Path Back to Target - 12-03-15
businesses and households in Sheffield and beyond can focus
on what really matters to them.
And my bottom line is going to be that there is a risk that the
combination of persistently low global inflation and the
strength of sterling could weigh on prices here for some time.
But despite these headwinds, a solid UK expansion,
underpinned by strong domestic demand growth, leaves us
on track to return inflation to target within the next two
years. And to deliver that outcome, a gently rising path for
Bank Rate is likely to be required over the next few years.
So I think a fair question is - why do we target low, but
positive, inflation - that 2% rate - rather than zero or even
negative rate of change in prices? Now the simple answer is and for my own purposes don't really need to go farther than
this - is because it’s our job; it's a job given to us by the
democratically elected representatives of the British people.
We are mandated by Parliament to do that and we have an
operational independence in order to accomplish that.
And there's a very good accountability mechanism around
this. On those occasions where inflation moves by more than
one percentage point away from target, we are required to
explain publicly why that happened and what we’re going to
do about it. And we're required to do that in an open letter
from the Governor to the Chancellor.
And in the past there have been 14 of these letters written by
my predecessors, in every case because inflation's been too
high. Now particularly subdued inflation in January meant
that I had to write the first of these letters to explain why
inflation was too low. And it's likely that I'll have to write a
few more of these over the course of the year. I'll come back
to why that's the case and what we're going to do about it in
a moment.

Page 11
Writing the Path Back to Target - 12-03-15
But sticking with why we target 2%, this reflects the lessons
of the past, particularly of the '70s and '80s, those difficult
decades when we had high and volatile inflation as well as the
deflationary disasters that have followed past financial crises.
Low, stable and predictable inflation helps to stabilise
households’ and firms’ expectations about future price
increases. And that helps them obviously plan their
spending, and hiring and investment decisions. In short, the
Bank of England worries about inflation so all of you don't
have to, except for the time that I'm speaking about it during
this speech, when you have to worry about it.
We worry because high inflation damages growth, in part
because it tends to be volatile, it generates uncertainty and
makes it difficult to make those investment and hiring
decisions. In contrast, a little bit of inflation helps grease the
wheels of the economy. And an important example of that is
in the labour market, where workers usually resist outright
reductions in the level of their wages when economic
conditions deteriorate. And so a positive inflation rate helps
to smooth that adjustment.
A positive inflation rate also gives monetary policy the space
it needs to respond to negative shocks by cutting interest
rates. And that’s because, in normal times, the so-called
equilibrium rate of interest, in other words the rate of interest
at which the economy would tend to settle without generating
inflation, is equal to the underlying rate of growth plus the
inflation rate. So the lower the average inflation, the less
scope we have to reduce interest rates to respond to shocks
before those interest rates approach zero.
And this point about where the equilibrium interest rate is,
the rate we would want when the economy is in equilibrium,
is so central to monetary policy and certainly to the current

Page 12
Writing the Path Back to Target - 12-03-15
circumstances globally, I'm going to come back to it further in
a few minutes.
Now persistently low inflation can be difficult because it
undermines these dynamics. But proper deflation - outright
deflation - by which I mean persistent, not temporary, but
persistent and generalised falls in in prices, is potentially
dangerous.
During the Great Depression, sharp falls in prices reinforced
collapsing output and skyrocketing unemployment. And to
consider how susceptible we might be here in the UK to
deflation, it's helpful to review why deflation is potentially
dangerous.
Now the most commonly cited reason is that falling prices
may prompt households to delay their purchases or
businesses to delay investment. And that creates a negative
feedback loop where there's a fall in demand as a
consequence, which leads to further falls in prices and higher
unemployment. And of course that higher unemployment
further reduces incomes and spending, and draws the
economy into a vortex.
But the relevance of this story depends on households’
willingness and ability to delay consumption. There are
certain goods for which households can't delay consumption food, education, others. On top of that, the psychology of
instant gratification - the tendency of all of us to discount the
future heavily relative to the present - mutes our willingness
to wait for lower prices. And it’s fair to say - I'll give the stats
in a moment - there’s little evidence of delayed gratification
yet taking hold in the United Kingdom.
There would, however, be a more clear and present danger
arising from the balance sheets of households and firms,
should deflation persist. And this is now the concern across

Page 13
Writing the Path Back to Target - 12-03-15
the advanced world, including here in the UK, where private
debt levels remain very high relative to history.
As you know when a household takes out a mortgage or a
firm takes out a loan, the amount owed is denominated in
cash terms - in other words, not adjusted for inflation. And
so if there's unexpected or generalised falls in prices that
means the real value of that debt increases: the same
amount of money is owed, but that money now buys more
goods and services. And as a result, more consumption and
investment needs to be foregone in order to service that
debt. And it's that negative feedback loop, that vortex, that
debt-deflation dynamic that was at the core of the Great
Depression and at the core of the Japanese malaise following
the collapse of the asset bubbles there in the 1980s.
And this dynamic is of particular concern if the pace of wage
growth were to follow prices down. Now again, there is no
evidence of that currently in the UK, where wage growth has
picked up over the course of the last six months. More
broadly, since the 2008 crisis, in many respects debt deflation
has been the dog that hasn’t barked - we would have
expected much more of this globally than we've actually
seen.
But we shouldn’t rest too easy - there are several reasons
why that dog might just be sleeping, and central banks need
to be vigilant to ensure that the recent low inflation doesn't
begin to stir that dog from its slumber.
Now low global inflation matters for the UK because we're an
open economy - this facility is a testament to that. Around
one-third of goods and services consumed in the United
Kingdom are imported from abroad, and that creates a direct
channel from lower foreign prices here to prices in the UK. In
addition, we export around 30% of our GDP, and that creates
an indirect channel because that changes the balance of

Page 14
Writing the Path Back to Target - 12-03-15
supply and demand for labour and other inputs, again which
has an impact on inflation here.
Now the importance of these channels has waxed and waned
over decades, with the changes both to the degree of global
integration and how monetary policy has been conducted. So
under the old Bretton Woods system, which went from after
the Second World War until the early 1970s, there was a
system of fixed exchange rates and relatively closed
international financial and goods markets. At that time, there
was relatively low correlation between inflation abroad,
inflation in the UK, inflation between various countries.
And that situation changed with the collapse of Bretton
Woods in the early 1970s. And so throughout the '70s and
'80s and the difficult years then, and the challenges on this
site in the early 1980s - 1984 that Dick, you mentioned, we
had a situation of high volatile inflation and also inflation that
was highly correlated around the world, particularly across
the advanced world. And you had central banks who lacked
an anchor, a nominal anchor, to guide policy, to manage
global shocks and to achieve the necessary reduction in
inflation.
And it wasn't until the early 1990s when the era of Inflation
Targeting was ushered in, led by very much the Bank of
England, that things changed. From that point on, central
banks took much greater, although not total, mastery over
their monetary destinies. At the same time, there has been
from that period increased integration of global financial
markets - goods markets, to some extent labour markets
with technology. And that's been a countervailing force to
the power of Inflation Targeting.
So we have a situation where you have better monetary
policy, but you have a more integrated global economy. It's
meant that it's far superior - we have control over inflation in

Page 15
Writing the Path Back to Target - 12-03-15
our own economy relative to those difficult years of the '70s
and '80s, but not to the same extent when we had effectively
a closed economy under Bretton Woods in the immediate
post-war period.
And what's happened since the financial crisis is that the
correlations between inflation rates in the major advanced
economies has picked up. So we have to recognise that as
we're writing our monetary scripts, at the very least we have
an editor. And if we're not careful, we as central banks could
become ghostwriters.
So why is inflation low globally? Well, the obvious and the
most important fact right now is, with me, is that there has
been a sharp fall in the price of oil, as we all know. In our
view at the Bank of England, that sharp fall in the price of oil
has largely been driven by positive supply developments as
opposed to weaker demand developments. And that means
it’s good news for the global economy and it's unambiguously
good news for the UK economy. We estimate that lower oil
prices will boost the level of UK-weighted global GDP - so the
bit of the globe that matters most for us - by a little under
one percentage point over the next three years. And that
means a direct boost in demand for our exports of around
two and a half percentage points.
Lower oil prices will also boost UK domestic demand directly
as households spend the windfall that they get at the petrol
pump. Our forecast conservatively assumes that they
actually save about 50 pence in the pound of that amount
that they're saving at the pump. And on balance, there's
likely upside risk to growth and inflation from that
assumption. But it's important to recognise - and the reason
I'm talking about global inflation is that oil isn’t the whole
story. Measures of inflation globally that strip out volatile
factors, such as energy and food, other commodities, have
been trending down as well.

Page 16
Writing the Path Back to Target - 12-03-15

And currently - and this is so-called core inflation - and
currently core inflation in the UK is running at about 1.4%,
and it is likely to decline further in coming months, reflecting
in part sterling’s past strength and muted domestic cost
growth.
The weakness in core inflation globally reflects a shortfall of
global demand relative to global supply. And in addition, in
some major economies there are some powerful additional
disinflationary forces. For example, in the euro area, a series
of necessary internal devaluations are weighing on wages and
prices. And in China, a rebalancing of investment and
consumption risks creating further disinflation. In fact, in
China the producer price inflation rate has been negative for
35 months in a row, reflecting long-standing overcapacity in
industries such as concrete and steel, as we'd know, while the
more recent weakness in the Chinese property market could
further increase excess capacity in related sectors, such as
construction.
All of this suggests that a persistent period of low inflation
globally is a possibility. And as I mentioned a few moments
ago, this could itself create a self-fulfilling fear of a bad
outcome. The dynamic is that concerns that household and
government debt will weigh on demand and that that could
cause firms to delay further their already weak investment
spending - and I'm speaking globally at the moment.
Such a rational corporate caution is consistent with the
behaviour of many financial asset prices at the moment,
which appear to be pricing in a possibility of material
downside risks, such as that that economic weakness and
persistently low global inflation could become mutually
reinforcing.

Page 17
Writing the Path Back to Target - 12-03-15
So what if inflation is slow to return to target abroad? What
does it mean for us? Well, obviously it will heighten the
challenge of returning inflation quickly to target here in the
United Kingdom, not just because of the direct impacts of low
global inflation, but because weak global conditions tend to
push down on that equilibrium interest rate that I mentioned
earlier, that rate that's necessary to maintain the balance
between supply and demand in the economy and to keep
inflation at its target.
And that interest rate has been falling for the last three
decades. It likely turned negative during the downturn,
which is why steps such as quantitative easing were
necessary, why central banks had to turn to unconventional
tools.
In the case of the UK and the US, measures such as largescale asset purchases have been effective in supporting
domestically generated inflation. So we're in a situation
where that negative equilibrium interest rate might be turning
positive here in the UK as domestic headwinds have abated.
Now it’s still likely negative in other major economies such as
Europe, reflecting an excess of savings over investment.
And it's in that regard, that the ECB’s recent moves to reduce
its deposit facility rate to–0.2%, and to commence large-scale
asset purchases, are both timely and welcome.
However, in an environment of low rates everywhere, and in
some cases negative rates in many places, even the Bank
Rate of the Bank of England of 0.5% might begin to look
high-yielding. And the fear of a bad outcome abroad could
trigger safe-haven flows into the UK that could push sterling
higher, making exports more challenging and with knock-on
impacts for wages and prices here at home.

Page 18
Writing the Path Back to Target - 12-03-15
Further moves would come against the backdrop of a 5.5%
sterling appreciation on a trade-weighted basis in the last
year, and that move extended the currency’s appreciation to
around 17% since its trough after the crisis two years ago.
These moves are reinforcing the disinflationary impulse from
abroad, and they could take a while to pass through to
sterling prices in the shops.
All of this puts - all of these global developments and the
stance of sterling - puts a premium on generating the
domestic inflation necessary to return inflation to target. And
the good news is we're on track to do just that. The UK
economy is performing well. UK growth is solid,
unemployment is coming down, with over 600,000 jobs
created in the past year. Wage growth is showing signs of
picking up, not slowing down. Wage growth in fact rose to
3.3% in the private sector at the end of last year. Averages
hours worked continue to recover on a strong upward trend.
And consumer confidence and retail sales are at their highest
levels in over a decade. And similarly real income growth is
on course to be its strongest in a decade. Firms’ investment
intentions are robust and surveys point to consistent solid
growth above its trend rate.
So as I said before, there is little evidence of that deflationary
mind-set setting in in the United Kingdom. In fact, with
domestic demand growing at around 3% in 2014, again the
fastest rate in a decade, all of these factors should underpin
the momentum needed to bring domestic cost growth back
up to a rate that's consistent with the inflation target.
The fall in inflation that we’re experiencing now, the reason I
have to write these letters, is in large part due to the fall in
energy prices. It is not generalised deflation proper. The
proportion of prices that are actually falling is absolutely
consistent with the average over the course of the past
decade.

Page 19
Writing the Path Back to Target - 12-03-15

Now all that said, we will be vigilant in monitoring people's
expectations of inflation to ensure that there aren't these
second round effects. But on balance, those inflation
expectations remain broadly consistent with our 2% target,
and as we noted in our February Report, in any event we
retain considerable policy options should any downside risks
materialise.
So let me conclude, and we'll get to questions. The Bank of
England cares as much about inflation that's below target as
it does above. With inflation below target and unemployment
still above its long-run sustainable rate, we're looking to
return inflation to target within the course of the next two
years.
In our most recent forecast, we expect exactly that to
happen. Consistent with limited and gradual increases in
Bank Rate over the course of the next three years in order to
bring inflation not just back to target, but to bring it back to
target in a sustainable manner.
The pace and the degree of these rate increases will be
affected by a variety of factors, including, as I've been
discussing, the evolution of foreign prices and our exchange
rate, as well as domestic cost pressures. While the Bank can
be expected to look through one-off shocks, it may be
appropriate for us to take into account persistent external
deflationary forces arising from the combination of continued
foreign inflation and the protracted effects of sterling’s
strength on consumer prices, particularly if these forces were
to intensify.
Now Sheffield has shown that in a rapidly changing global
economic landscape, hard work, clarity of purpose, and
fleetness of foot give manufacturing the freedom to write its
own future. And we have the example in your booklet.

Page 20
Writing the Path Back to Target - 12-03-15

The Bank also faces global risks as it seeks to return inflation
to target. But we remain the author of our nominal destiny.
We have the responsibility to return inflation to target over
the course of the next two years, to do so in a timely manner,
and we will write the next chapter that seeks to do so.
With that, I thank you for your attention and look forward to
your questions. Thank you very much.
Applause
Q&A
Mark Abrahams, Fenner:

Governor, you've spent quite a lot of time talking about the
dangers of deflation, but we have been running for quite a
considerable period of time with very low interest rates and
indeed negative real interest rates.
What do you see the dangers of such a policy for such a
prolonged period of time, particularly with regard to attitudes
to investment and the almost intractable high level of debt
that we seem to be running with?

Mark Carney:

It's a great question. And this is something that we at the
Bank of England spend a tremendous amount of time thinking
about. Because one of the strengths of the new structure of
the Bank of England - I'm going to make a slightly tortured
analogy, but just as this institute brings together academia,
business, researchers from around, in a partnership, the new
Bank of England brings together not just the monetary side,
which I concentrated on today, keeping inflation on target,
but the supervision of the financial system - safety and
soundness of our banks, and some of them are here today;
thank you for coming, Chris - and the so-called
macroprudential side, so exactly what you're worried about.
What your question points to is - how sustainable are the

Page 21
Writing the Path Back to Target - 12-03-15
debt levels in our economy, both on the household basis and
in the financial markets? And so those are brought together,
and our job is to co-ordinate policies in a way that's
consistent.
So we need to, as I've been arguing, we need to provide
appropriate stimulus to the economy to bring inflation back
up to target. And for the avoidance of doubt, as I said in the
speech, that's consistent with, we think, a gently rising path
of interest rates over the next few years. But rates will still
be relatively low and they will have been low for a long time to your question.
So the question is - what else can we do to address the
potential risks that are caused by these? And there's two
classes - I would say there's two classes of risk. The most
important risk in terms of our long-term future are centred in
the household sector. Potential excessive borrowing,
particularly on the mortgage side - for mortgage debt.
And we put in place some measures last spring to take out
insurance against that risk. Effectively what we did, and
financial institutions have complied with this, is we said - we
want to limit the proportion of highly levered mortgages that
are given, and we gave specific parameters. Because it's fair
if you're a first time buyer or you have certain characteristics
- there's a place for these types of highly geared mortgages,
but not for everybody. So we didn't want the entire housing
market to adjust upwards, because we've seen far too many
times in the past - when I lived here in the late '80s and '90s
and saw that experience where originally responsible
underwriting standards turned to reckless. And so we tried to
prevent that. So we put that in place. We put in income
tests and other things in place, and that's helped stabilise
that market, stabilise the underwriting standards and
promote good behaviour. So that's one way we addressed
the risk for our most important sector.

Page 22
Writing the Path Back to Target - 12-03-15

And we're reinforcing in that regard a dynamic that is
relatively unique to the UK globally, which is that household
debt here has actually been coming down. Really it's just in
the US and the UK are the major economies where that's
been the case. It's come down by about 20 percentage
points relative to income. It's still a bit too high, but it's at
least heading in the right direction. That's the first class.
The second class, and the much more difficult class of risk to
address, are in financial markets, because they're global and
we have influence over sterling markets, but we can't dictate
standards globally.
We can negotiate standards globally, which is part of what
we've been doing. So standards for much higher capital in
banks globally; reorganising how derivatives and other
markets are structured, so that if one institution fails, the
whole market doesn't fail; and changing the way that liquidity
is provided to the system by the Bank - so-called plumbing of
the system. So we're doing this series of measures like that
to make the system more resilient.
I would say that work is not yet completely done, but it is there's a clear agenda there that has improved the core of
the system. And thus far, it'll end here, thus far when we've
had shocks in that system, such as when the Swiss franc
moved, or in October of last year when there was a big shock
in the US treasury market, or 18 months ago when the socalled taper tantrum happened, the core of the system has
absolutely held up and not amplified the shock. And the
great tragedy of the crisis is when we had the shock, the core
of the system collapsed and amplified it all the way down to
the shop floor around the country.
So your question's on point, but part of what we can do as a
bank is be co-ordinated so we can provide the stimulus that's

Page 23
Writing the Path Back to Target - 12-03-15
necessary for the economy while at the same time protecting
it against these risks. Thank you.
Wayne Bowser, Beal Homes:

Clearly, you mentioned within your speech our relationship
with Europe, which will remain important before, during and
after the election. And you referred to the fact that the ECB
had determined to acquire assets recently, and I think you
said it was both timely and appropriate.
There are others of course who might say it's long overdue,
and I just wondered the extent that the Bank of England can
and does seek to influence what goes on, say, with a partner
as closely linked to us as Europe.

Mark Carney:

Sorry, Wayne, I didn't quite capture the last bit of your
question.

Wayne Bowser, Beal Homes:

I just wondered what was the Bank's ability to influence such
as the ECB in those decisions, given the nature of the
relationship between us.

Mark Carney:

I see. Yeah. Well, it's we have a close relationship with the
major central banks, as you would expect us to. Not just the
ECB, the Fed, but the major emerging market central banks.
And we're in regular contact with them. I met with all the
governors of all the major - the top 14 central banks - on
Sunday - Sunday and Monday. I speak regularly to the
President of the ECB. My colleagues speak to his colleagues
as well.
And we do that for several reasons. First and foremost is to
understand each other, because we're in an integrated world
and the stance of their policy affects not just their economic
outlook, but prices of assets and potentially how we would
react. Secondly, to the extent possible, to try to co-ordinate
on things such as financial reform. Thirdly, to share
experiences of what works and what doesn't, because we are

Page 24
Writing the Path Back to Target - 12-03-15
- let's be clear - in some respects we have been in
extraordinary times since the crisis. The good news for the
UK is that we're on a path - and we want to stay on that path
- but we're on a path to exit from those extraordinary times
and start to normalise policy when appropriate.
But for the ECB they're entering something that we entered
several years ago. So we've shared perspective with the ECB
on how we conducted QE, what we thought worked, what
didn’t. How we constructed various facilities that provided
liquidity to banks - again what worked, what didn't. And
shared experience and, you know, I think on the margin - one
would hope on the margin helped formulate their policies
which are tailored obviously to their structure.
Let me say one last thing about the ECB and their steps on
QE. One of the most important things about that programme
is the fact that the existence of the programme, the validity
of undertaking asset purchases, was unanimously agreed by
the Governing Council of the ECB. So all central banks
represented, all members of the Governing council, agreed
that this is an appropriate tool in the central bank toolkit.
Now some members thought that maybe now wasn't the time
or the size of the programme wasn't exactly the right thing,
but the important thing is that now the ECB is in a position
that is analogous to the Bank of England, to the Fed, other
major central banks in that it has a full toolkit and it can
respond to eventualities as needed.
And reasonable people can disagree about the actual amounts
and the timing, etc., but it's crucial and it's particularly
important in an environment where there inevitably will be
shocks. And in Europe, as they go through a period of
continued integration, having a full toolkit could prove quite
valuable. Thank you.

Page 25
Writing the Path Back to Target - 12-03-15
David Child, Chair of Chamber
of Commerce Council, Sheffield:

Great to see you here. My question's about peer funding and
crowd funding - peer lending, crowd funding. Because in the
Victorian era there were 40 odd regional stock exchanges
outside London, and the LSE gradually closed them down.
And I see peer lending and crowd funding in a sense as a
modern day version of that. But I feel there might be a
danger of over-kindness with over-regulation, which might kill
it. What's your view on those two forms of investment and
participation and about regulating them?

Mark Carney:

Yes. I think one of the - let me speak in general terms first,
and then I'll get to your question. The first thing is that we
have adopted a stance in terms of regulation of the traditional
core of the financial system - banks and building societies,
one that encourages new entry. And so we have streamlined
the entry procedures. They're still, you know, they're still
robust, as you would expect, but we've streamlined entry
procedures, we've lowered capital requirements; we've had
transition paths for new challenger banks. And we've set up
the conditions, we think, that we're in a much better position
to resolve institutions that might not succeed, just like any
business doesn't succeed.
The more confidence we have in that, the more confidence we
have that new banks, building societies or other financial
institutions can die as well as be born in a way that doesn't
affect the broader system.
The more competition, the more entry, the more access to
finance the system will have. So the end of the life is as
important as the start. And we've made a lot of progress on
both ends, I think.
In terms of peer to peer and crowd funding, it's not - this isn't
direct - these are not banks, they're taking deposits, it's
direct channels, and so - nor building societies, nor insurance

Page 26
Writing the Path Back to Target - 12-03-15
companies. So therefore they don't fall directly under our
regulatory remit. There are conduct issues around in terms
of disclosure and, you know, the appropriateness of the
investor base, but that's for the Financial Conduct Authority
to oversee, which they do.
I would say there's a general disposition that, whether it is in
those sectors or in the sectors that - include digital payments,
digital currencies as opposed to financial innovation - to as
much as possible try to tailor the phasing of regulation and
oversight in a way that allows for innovation, while continuing
to protect the system.
Because my last point on it is - we have a general principle
that we think a more diverse financial system isn't just good
for the end user, whether it's the investor or the business or
the household, but it's better for the system as a whole,
because when you have diversity, you have resilience. So we
take a positive attitude - positive but responsible attitude to
new entry. Thanks.
Robert Teal, Chamber of
Commerce Council Member,
Rotherham and Barnsley:

You mention, Governor, the long-term competitiveness
problems that the UK economy has had. Would you comment
in any way about the contribution that openness - especially
openness of markets and openness to highly skilled foreign
workers being able to come to our country - can contribute to
our competitiveness?
Also the new treaty with the United States, which I
understand could contribute over 1% to GDP. So openness
and the Bank.

Mark Carney:

Well, there are a lot of traps in that question for a central
banker [laughter]. See how many I fall into.

Page 27
Writing the Path Back to Target - 12-03-15
Let me start at a very high level - above the ceiling - you
know, openness is a good thing. This economy is, you know,
historically this has been the strength of the UK and it's
admired. And as a Canadian, I very much have admired the
openness of this economy right down to the openness to have
someone like me standing here as the governor of your
central bank.
But the openness - I'm not sure I'd put myself in the skilled
foreign worker camp - just in the foreign worker camp, by the
way.
But the openness to trade, the openness to investment and to
the flow of labour and ideas, these are the bedrock of this
economy and it is widely and rightly admired around the
world. And the more that we reinvest, reinforce and continue
those trends, I think, is to the benefit of the United Kingdom.
In terms of human capital, that's probably the right place to
leave it, which is that you see it in the AMRC and you see it in
the work of the AMRC. You see it in the businesses that are
associated. You see it in the University of Sheffield. You
know, Keith and I were talking earlier about the very high
quality of flow of gifted foreign students who come here, who
stay here, who ultimately work here - work alongside people
from Sheffield who are building advanced manufacturing and
techniques and associated jobs that moves this region and
this country forward.
So it's central, but it has to be integrated. And it's
integrating those ideas and it's integrating those businesses
into the global supply chains, which is one thing we didn't
touch on that much in this Q&A and I didn't touch on really at
all in my speech. But I tell you, we spent the bulk of our 45
minutes I think - or an hour and a half, I guess 45 minutes of
the hour and a half - talking about supply chains and how
entities such as this, where the UK fits in and what that

Page 28
Writing the Path Back to Target - 12-03-15
means for the future. All of that again underscores - if it's a
supply chain, it is almost by definition global, and therefore
you need openness to succeed in it.
So thank you, thank you for your question.
Keith Burnett:

Well, thank you very much for that really great speech. I just
want to thank you all first of all for joining us at the AMRC in
the University of Sheffield. This place is playing a really vital
role in making sure that supply chain for the nuclear industry
can get the business it needs. And the things we talked
through, just as you said Mark, were very much about that.
When you look around this facility, if you get a chance to look
at it now or at other times, what you'll see is world-leading
facilities. This is truly a world-leading manufacturing
capability in nuclear. And we've had that reaffirmed by the
partners we will see coming in from China, from Japan, but
also from UK companies across the board.
You'll see prototyping, design, machining, drilling, forging - all
the sort of things we need. And you'll see people - I hope
you'll see the real vision it took. And Richard, you talked
about that, about the future vision you had to build this with
people like Adie and with John and with Keith. And it's
something we're deeply and wonderfully proud of. And
you've gone on as well to train the people, the skilled people
we need. You can see the - I think you may have seen all of
the training centre where we're training the people that we
need for the future.
But I want to add one thing to it, which we're moving on to
do now. You talked about the needs for the supply chain.
We know in this region and in the United Kingdom, we have a
fabulously powerful but unrealised capability to build much of
the UK's infrastructure. We know that's going to take a lot of
investment. And what I want to say to you here - watch this

Page 29
Writing the Path Back to Target - 12-03-15
space, because we're going to be putting together the sort of
structure of private and public - of capability that can attract
that investment. Because we're going to build the
infrastructure of the United Kingdom; we're going to build
those things here in the Sheffield region with partners. And
it's the sort of help you're giving in maintaining that stability,
giving to the advice that's needed so people can feel precious
and comfortable that investing in this place is so important.
So I want to thank you again for coming here. Thank you for
supporting the things that are so important to this region and
to all the industrial partners we have. And again, thank you
all for coming here today to listen to this great speech.
Thank you very much, Mark, and thank you very much.
Applause
END

